@ignore

© 2026 Scott L. Burson

This document is published under the Creative Commons
@uref{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/, CC BY-NC-SA 4.0} license.  This license
enables reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format for
noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator.  If you remix,
adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms.
@end ignore

@node Afterword
@unnumbered Afterword

It has been an interesting experience working on FSet and this book over the last eight months or
so, while LLM-driven programming has exploded onto the scene.  As I promised on the title page, this
book contains no LLM-generated text whatsoever.  I wasn't going to use an LLM to generate any code
for FSet either, but at one point, curiosity got the better of me and I had Claude Code try to write
one function (@code{ch-bag-tree-less}).  I checked it meticulously; it was very close to correct,
but not perfect.  At that point, I was almost done with the major coding anyway, so I went back to
doing it by hand.

Programming manually has come to feel a little quixotic, but I'm still glad I did it.  It's clear
that LLMs don't yet have the design sense of a skilled human.  Writing this book, I came across a
number of points where I thought improving the code was a better choice than documenting its current
behavior, so I made those improvements; I don't think an LLM, at least in early 2026, would have had
the judgment to know when to do that, and if I weren't writing the book myself, I might not have
noticed the issues in the first place.

At the very least, FSet can be my small contribution to the world's human-generated training data.

FSet is now faster, better tested and debugged@footnote{I thank Paul Dietz for his help writing
tests.}, more feature-complete, and with this book, much better documented than it has been for the
bulk of its nearly-two-decade history.

I think FSet makes writing Common Lisp easier and more enjoyable.  I hope it not only finds wider
use within the Common Lisp community, but also helps grow that community by attracting people who
have not yet discovered the pleasures of the language.

--- Scott L. Burson, April 2026
