@ignore

© 2026 Scott L. Burson

This document is published under the Creative Commons
@uref{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/, CC BY-NC-SA 4.0} license.  This license
enables reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format for
noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator.  If you remix,
adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms.
@end ignore

@node FSet API Reference
@chapter FSet API Reference

This chapter documents the FSet 2 API.  All symbols should be accessed via package @code{fset2}.

All FSet classes are structure classes.  Each has a predicate, whose name is that of the class
followed by a question mark, e.g., @code{set?}.

Most FSet abstract types have two implementations (with a possibility of more in the future).  There
are generic constructor functions and macros, which do not specify an implementation, and do not
accept custom comparison or hashing functions; they are recommended for situations in which these
details are unimportant.  Implementation-specific constructors are also provided that do accept
these customizations.

In most cases, operations that require a single collection take it as the first argument.  (CL is
itself inconsistent about this; the collection is more commonly the second argument
(e.g. @code{member}, @code{assoc}), but then there's @code{aref} and @code{elt}.)  The exceptions
are the higher-order operators @code{image} (or @code{map-image}), @code{filter}, and @code{reduce},
which all take the function to call first, to be consistent with one another and with CL's
@code{mapcar}, @code{remove-if-not}, and @code{reduce} respectively; and most of the shadowed CL
sequence operations --- @code{find} @href{Shadowed CL sequence operations, @i{etc.}} (obviously, I
couldn't change the argument orders of these, if the shadowed versions are to be compatible).

The methods as listed here do not correspond exactly to the ones in the FSet code.  In many cases
what I've given as one method here is actually two or more, because there are subclasses which have
distinct methods in the code that I've treated as one method here.  Also, I've omitted trailing
@code{t} specializers, since they don't affect method selection, and @code{&key} on methods that
don't actually have any keyword parameters, even though other methods on the same generic function
do.

@anchor{arbitrary} There is sometimes confusion over the meaning of @code{arb}, which returns an
arbitrary element of a set or bag, or an arbitrary pair of a map or binary relation.  ``Arbitrary''
doesn't mean ``randomly selected''; it simply means that the sole postcondition is that the returned
value is in the collection --- FSet may pick any convenient element or pair.  In particular,
@code{arb} on a given collection instance will always return the same thing; by itself, it doesn't
iterate --- although you can use @code{less} to remove the returned element/pair from the
collection, creating a new collection instance on which @code{arb} will necessarily return something
different.

This chapter uses the notation [@i{a} .. @i{b}) for an integer interval inclusive of @i{a} and
exclusive of @i{b}.  It also uses ``iff'' as an abbreviation for ``if and only if''.

@deftp {Data type} collection
The root class of the FSet functional collections hierarchy.
@end deftp

@defun collection? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional collection.
@end defun

@deftp {Data type} transient-collection
The root class of the FSet @href{Transients, transient} collections hierarchy.
@end deftp

@defun transient-collection? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient collection.
@end defun

@hrule{}


@c ================================================================================
@node Notes on Time Complexity
@section Notes on Time Complexity

Most lookup operations, and most ``point update'' operations (which update a single element or
pair), have O(log @i{n}) time complexity.  In these cases, @i{n} refers to the size of the
collection.

FSet has several operations, such as @code{union} on sets, that combine two collections.  These
operations are normally O(@i{n}), but there are two exceptions.  On one hand, if the collections are
not of the same type and organization, more generic methods are invoked that are O(@i{n} log @i{n}).
On the other, under some circumstances (when they are of the same type and organization), they can
take O(log @i{n}) time.  The latter occurs if they are @dfn{historically related}: one is the result
of making a small number of point updates on the 6other, or they are both the result of making such
updates on a common ancestor.  Under such circumstances, their internal trees will be largely
shared; the implementations detect and exploit this sharing to elide most of the work.

Also, even when these operations do take O(@i{n}) time, there's the question of exactly what @i{n}
corresponds to.  For many of these operations, in the worst case, it's the sum of the two sizes, but
in typical cases it's often closer to the minimum of the two.  For some operations, notably
intersection (including map and bag intersection and bag product), it's the minimum even in the
worst case.  For asymmetrical operations like set-difference, it's the size of the left operand.


@c ================================================================================
@node Sets
@section Sets

A set is an unordered collection of values without duplicates, called its elements or members, with
efficient operations to add or remove a value and to test whether the set contains a value.  Adding
a value to a set that already contains it, or removing one from a set that does not contain it,
results in the same set.

Although sets are conceptually unordered, FSet imposes an order for its own purposes.  The WB
implementation allows you to @href{Custom Comparison and Hash Functions, control} this ordering.

The default implementation of sets is currently CHAMP (@code{ch-set}).  The WB implementation
(@code{wb-set}) is also available.

@deftp {Data type} set
The abstract class for FSet functional sets.  Subclass of @code{collection}.
@end deftp

@defun set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional set.
@end defun

@deftp {Data type} transient-set
The abstract class for FSet transient sets.  Subclass of @code{transient-collection}.
@end deftp

@defun transient-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient set.
@end defun

@defun empty-set
Constructor function.  Returns an empty set of the default implementation, currently @code{ch-set},
and the default organization.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro set}
@defmac set @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a set of the default implementation, currently @code{ch-set}, and the
default organization, according to the supplied argument subforms.  Each argument subform can be an
expression, whose value will be an element of the result set; or a list of the form @code{($
@var{expression})}, in which case the expression must evaluate to a set, all of whose elements
become elements of the result set.
@end defmac

@anchor{Type ch-set}
@deftp {Data type} ch-set
Functional sets implemented using CHAMP trees.  Subclass of @code{set}.  These print as:

@example
##@{ @i{e0} @i{e1} ... @}[@i{compare-fn}]
@end example

Note the double @code{#}, which indicates CHAMP.  The comparison function is printed only if it is not
@code{compare}.
@end deftp

@defun ch-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional CHAMP set.
@end defun

@defun empty-ch-set @r{&key} compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty @code{ch-set}.  By default, it will be ordered by
@code{compare}.  To use a custom ordering, supply the comparison function name (a symbol) as
@code{compare-fn-name}; a hash function must have been defined for it using
@href{Macro define-hash-function, @code{define-hash-function}}.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro ch-set}
@defmac ch-set @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{ch-set} according to the supplied argument subforms.  See
@href{Macro set, @code{set}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@defmac ch-custom-set compare-fn-name @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{ch-set} with a custom organization, according to the supplied
argument subforms.  @code{compare-fn-name} must be a symbol naming the desired comparison function;
a hash function must have been defined for it using @href{Macro define-hash-function,
@code{define-hash-function}}.  See @href{Macro set, @code{set}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of
@var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Type wb-set}
@deftp {Data type} wb-set
Functional sets implemented using WB-trees.  Subclass of @code{set}.  These print as:

@example
#@{ @i{e0} @i{e1} ... @}[@i{compare-fn}]
@end example

Note the single @code{#}, which indicates WB.  The comparison function is printed only if it is not
@code{compare}.
@end deftp

@defun wb-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional WB-tree set.
@end defun

@defun empty-wb-set @r{&key} compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty wb-set.  By default, it will be ordered by
@code{compare}.  To use a custom ordering, supply the comparison function name (a symbol) as
@code{compare-fn-name}.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro wb-set}
@defmac wb-set @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{wb-set} according to the supplied argument subforms.  See
@href{Macro set, @code{set}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@defmac wb-custom-set compare-fn-name @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{wb-set} with a custom organization, according to the supplied
argument subforms.  @code{compare-fn-name} must be a symbol naming the desired comparison function.
See @href{Macro set, @code{set}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Set Operations
@subsection Set Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (set)} @ s
Returns true iff @var{s} is empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {empty-set-like (set)} @ c
@deffnx Method {empty-set-like (bag)} @ c
Returns an empty set of the same type and organization as @var{c}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (set)} @ s
@deffnx Method {set-size (set)} @ s
Returns the number of elements in @var{s}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method arb (set)}
@deffn Method {arb (set)} @ s
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} element of @var{s}.  Specifically, on a nonempty set, returns
two values: an arbitrary element and true; on an empty set, returns two false values.  O(1).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method contains? (set)}
@deffn Method {contains? (set)} @ s x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an element of @var{s}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (set)} @ s x
If @var{s} contains @var{x}, returns two values, true and the element found; else false and
@code{nil}.  (This is useful for canonicalizing instances; the element found may be a different
instance from @var{x}.)  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method with (set)}
@anchor{Macro includef}
@deffn Method {with (set)} @ s x
Returns a set, of the same class and organization as @var{s}, that contains all elements of @var{s}
and also @var{x}.  If @var{s} already contained a value equal to @var{x}, according to its
comparison function, returns @var{s} itself.  (This is so you can find out whether the element was
added simply by calling @code{eq} on @var{s} and the result.)  O(log @i{n}).

@defmac includef s x
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{with}.  If place @var{s}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a set, updates it so the set now contains @var{x}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@anchor{Method less (set)}
@anchor{Macro excludef}
@deffn Method {less (set)} @ s x
Returns a set, of the same class and organization as @var{s}, that contains all elements of @var{s}
except @var{x}.  If @var{s} did not contain a value equal to @var{x}, according to its comparison
function, returns @var{s} itself.  (This is so you can find out whether the element was removed
simply by calling @code{eq} on @var{s} and the result.)  O(log @i{n}).

@defmac excludef s x
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{less}.  If place @var{s}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a set, updates it so the set does not contain @var{x}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {index (set)} @ s x
If @var{s} contains @var{x}, returns the index of @var{x} within the ordering of @var{s}; otherwise
@code{nil}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-index (set)} @ s idx
Returns the element at index @var{idx} within the ordering of @var{s}.  (On a @code{wb-set}, this is
the same as @code{at-rank}.)  @var{idx} must be in [0 .. size(@var{s})); otherwise, signals an error of
type @code{simple-type-error}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method union (set set)}
@anchor{Macro unionf}
@deffn Method {union (set set)} @ s1 s2
Returns a set of the same type and organization as @var{s1}, that contains all elements that are in
either @var{s1} or @var{s2}.  Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of
equal objects in the two sets, the result contains the instance that was in @var{s1}.  @href{Notes
on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.

@defmac unionf s1 s2
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{union}.  If place @var{s1}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a set, updates it so the set now contains all elements of
@var{s2}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@anchor{Method intersection (set set)}
@anchor{Macro intersectf}
@deffn Method {intersection (set set)} @ s1 s2
Returns a set of the same type and organization as @var{s1}, that contains all elements that are in
both @var{s1} and @var{s2}.  Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of
equal objects in the two sets, the result contains the instance that was in @var{s1}.  @href{Notes
on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.

@defmac intersectf s1 s2
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{intersection}.  If place
@var{s1} (which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a set, updates it so the set now contains only
elements that are also in @var{s2}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {set-difference (set set)} @ s1 s2
Returns a set of the same type and organization as @var{s1}, that contains all elements that are in
@var{s1} and not in @var{s2}.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {set-difference-2 (set set)} @ s1 s2
Returns, as two values: () a set of the same type and organization as @var{s1}, that contains all
elements that are in @var{s1} and not in @var{s2}, and () a set of the same type and organization as
@var{s2}, that contains all elements that are in @var{s2} and not in @var{s1}.  @href{Notes on Time
Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {subset? (set set)} @ s1 s2
Returns true iff every element of @var{s1} is also in @var{s2}.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity,
Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@defun proper-subset? s1 s2
Returns true iff every element of @var{s1} is also in @var{s2}, and @var{s1} is smaller than
@var{s2}.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end defun

@deffn Method {disjoint? (set set)} @ s1 s2
Returns true iff @var{s1} and @var{s2} have no elements in common.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity,
Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@anchor{Macro do-set}
@defmac do-set @r{(@var{var} @var{set} &optional @var{value}) &body} body
For each element of @var{set}, binds @var{var} to it and executes @var{body}.  When done,
returns @var{value} if supplied, otherwise @code{nil}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Method iterator (set)}
@deffn Method {iterator (set)} @ s
Returns a @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator} over the set.  The @code{:get} operation
returns two values: if there is another element remaining, returns it and a true second value, else
@code{nil} and false.  Creating an iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:get} operation is
amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method fun-iterator (set)}
@deffn Method {fun-iterator (set)} @ s
Returns a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator} over the set.  The @code{:first}
operation returns two values: if the iterator is not empty, returns the first element and a true
second value, else @code{nil} and false.  Creating an iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the
@code{:first} operation is O(1), and @code{:rest} is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {filter (function set)} @ pred s
@deffnx Method {filter (symbol set)} @ pred s
@deffnx Method {filter (map set)} @ pred s
@c Document (set set) and (bag set) too?
Returns a new set, of the same type and organization as @var{s}, containing only those elements that
satisfy @var{pred}.  @var{pred} must be a function, an fbound symbol, or a boolean-valued map.
O(@i{n} ⋅ tc(@var{pred})) + O(@i{r} log @i{r}), where tc(@var{pred}) is the time complexity of
@var{pred} and @i{r} is the size of the result.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {partition (function set)} @ pred s
@deffnx Method {partition (symbol set)} @ pred s
@deffnx Method {partition (map set)} @ pred s
Equivalent to @code{(values (filter pred s) (filter (complement pred) s))} when @var{pred} is a
function.  Returns two values: first, a new set, of the same type and organization as @var{s},
containing only those elements that satisfy @var{pred}; second, a similar set containing only those
elements that do @emph{not} satisfy @var{pred}.  @var{pred} must be a function, an fbound symbol, or
a boolean-valued map.  O(@i{n} ⋅ tc(@var{pred})) + O(@i{r} log @i{r}), where tc(@var{pred}) is the
time complexity of @var{pred} and @i{r} is the size of the result.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {image (function set)} @ fn s @r{&key} compare-fn-name
@deffnx Method {image (symbol set)} @ fn s @r{&key} compare-fn-name
@deffnx Method {image (map set)} @ fn s @r{&key} compare-fn-name
Returns a set containing the values of @var{fn} applied to all the elements of @var{s}.  Since the
result is a set, its elements will not necessarily correspond one-to-one to those of @var{s}; it
will impose its own ordering, and will be smaller than @var{s} if @var{fn} returns the same value on
two or more elements of @var{s}.  The result will be of the same type as @var{s}.
@var{compare-fn-name}, if supplied, will control its organization; otherwise, that will also be the
same as for @var{s}.  @var{fn} must be a function, an fbound symbol, or a map.  O(@i{n} ⋅
tc(@var{fn})) + O(@i{r} log @i{r}), where tc(@var{fn}) is the time complexity of @var{fn} and @i{r}
is the size of the result.

@defmac imagef s fn
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{image}.  If place @var{s}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a set, updates it so the place now contains the image of the
set under @var{fn}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {reduce (function set)} @ fn s @r{&key} key @r{(@var{initial-value} nil)}
@deffnx Method {reduce (symbol set)} @ fn s @r{&key} key @r{(@var{initial-value} nil)}
Calls @var{fn} repeatedly with two arguments, a state variable and the next element of @var{s},
storing the result of each call back into the state variable, and finally returning that result.  If
@var{initial-value} is supplied, it is used as the initial value of the state variable.  Otherwise:
if @var{s} is nonempty, the initial value is the first element; if @var{s} is empty, the result of
@code{reduce} is obtained by calling @var{fn} with no arguments.  In all cases, if @var{key} is
provided, it is called on each element and the result used in place of the element.  (Time
complexity depends on the behavior of @var{fn}.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find (t set)} @ item s @r{&key} key test
Scans linearly through @var{s} to find an element that matches @var{item} according to @var{key} and
@var{test}.  For each element of @var{s}, @var{key}, a function that defaults to the identity
function, is called on it, and then @var{test} is called on @var{item} and the result; if it returns
true, @code{find} returns the element.  If no match is found, @code{find} returns @code{nil}.
@var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.

Normally O(@i{n}), but as a special case, if @var{test} is @code{equal?}, @var{key} is not supplied,
and the set's comparison function is @code{compare}, this does an O(log @i{n}) lookup.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find-if (t set)} @ pred s @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through @var{s} to find an element for which the result of calling @var{key} on it
satisfies @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key}
defaults to the identity function.  Returns the element found, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find-if-not (t set)} @ pred s @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through @var{s} to find an element for which the result of calling @var{key} on it
does not satisfy @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.
@var{key} defaults to the identity function.  Returns the element found, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count (t set)} @ item s @r{&key} key test
Scans linearly through @var{s}, counting the number of elements that match @var{item} according to
@var{key} and @var{test}.  For each element of @var{s}, @var{key} is called on it, and then
@var{test} is called on @var{item} and the result; if it returns true, the element is counted.
Returns the count.  @var{key} and @var{test} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults
to the identity function; @var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.

Normally O(@i{n}), but as a special case, if @var{test} is @code{equal?}, @var{key} is not supplied,
and the set's comparison function is @code{compare}, this does an O(log @i{n}) lookup to return 0 or
1.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count-if (t set)} @ pred s @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through @var{s} to count the elements for which the result of calling @var{key} on
them satisfies @var{pred}.  Returns the count.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be functions or fbound
symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count-if-not (t set)} @ pred s @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through @var{s} to count the elements for which the result of calling @var{key} on
them does not satisfy @var{pred}.  Returns the count.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be functions or
fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node CH-Set Operations
@subsection CH-Set Operations

CHAMP sets support @href{Transients, transients}.

@deffn Method {make-transient (ch-set)} @ s @r{&key} synchronized?
Makes a @code{transient-ch-set} whose initial contents are those of @var{s}.  If
@code{synchronized?} is true, all operations on the transient will be serialized via locking;
otherwise, the transient is not thread-safe.
@end deffn

@anchor{Type transient-ch-set}
@deftp {Data type} transient-ch-set
A transient CHAMP set.  Subclass of @code{transient-set}.  These print simply as:

@example
#<TRANSIENT-CH-SET @i{id}>
@end example

where @i{id} is a serial number to identify the instance.
@end deftp

@defun transient-ch-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient CHAMP set.
@end defun

@hrule{}

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Transient-CH-Set Operations
@subsection Transient-CH-Set Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (transient-ch-set)} @ ts
Returns true iff @var{ts} is currently empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (transient-ch-set)} @ ts
Returns the current number of elements in @var{ts}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (transient-ch-set)} @ ts
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} element of the current contents of @var{ts}.  Specifically,
on a nonempty set, returns two values: an arbitrary element and true; on an empty set, returns two
false values.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (transient-ch-set)} @ ts x
Returns true iff @var{x} is currently an element of @var{ts}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {clear! (transient-ch-set)} @ ts
Removes all elements from @var{ts}, resetting it to the empty state.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {include! (transient-ch-set)} @ ts value
Modifies @var{ts} so that it contains @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the case.
Returns @var{ts}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {exclude! (transient-ch-set)} @ ts value
Modifies @var{ts} so that it does not contain @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the
case.  Returns @var{ts}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {make-persistent (transient-ch-set)} @ ts @r{&key} copy?
Returns a persistent FSet @code{ch-set} (the usual kind, with functional semantics) with the
contents of @var{ts}.  Subsequent modifications to the transient are permitted, and of course will
not affect the persistent one.

This operation has two modes, depending on @var{copy?}.  If @var{copy?} is false (the default), it
takes O(1) time; but subsequent modifications to the transient will behave performance-wise as if a
new transient had been created.  If @var{copy?}  is true, the operation takes O(n) time, but
subsequent modifications to the transient will run at full speed.  Copying the collection also
compacts it, so it uses less heap space.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node WB-Set Operations
@subsection WB-Set Operations

These operations make use of the ordering of the set, as determined by its comparison function.
They are not defined on CHAMP sets.

@deffn Method {rank (wb-set)} @ s x
If @var{s} contains @var{x}, returns the rank of @var{x} in the ordering defined by the comparison
function of @var{s}, and a true second value. If @var{x} is not in the set, the second value is
false, and the first value is the rank that @var{x} would have if it were added.  Note that if there
are values that are unequal but equivalent to @var{x}, an arbitrary order will be imposed on them
for this purpose; but another collection that is @code{equal?} but not @code{eq} to this one will in
general order them differently.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-rank (wb-set)} @ s rank
Returns the element whose rank is @var{rank}.  @var{rank} must be in [0 .. size(@var{m})).  Note
that if there are values that are unequal but equivalent in @var{s}, an arbitrary order will be
imposed on them for this purpose; but another collection that is @code{equal?} but not @code{eq} to
this one will in general order them differently.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {least (wb-set)} @ s
If @var{s} is nonempty, returns the element at rank 0 and a true second value; otherwise, @code{nil}
and false.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {greatest (wb-set)} @ s
If @var{s} is nonempty, returns the element with the largest rank and a true second value;
otherwise, @code{nil} and false.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-from (wb-set)} @ s x
Returns the subset of @var{s} with elements greater than or equal to @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-above (wb-set)} @ s x
Returns the subset of @var{s} with elements strictly greater than @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}) in general;
O(1) if @var{x} is the result of @code{(arb @var{s})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-through (wb-set)} @ s x
Returns the subset of @var{s} with elements less than or equal to @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-below (wb-set)} @ s x
Returns the subset of @var{s} with elements strictly less than @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}) in general;
O(1) if @var{x} is the result of @code{(arb @var{s})}.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Complement Sets
@subsection Complement Sets

A @dfn{complement set} represents the complement of a normal, enumerated set.  That is, the
complement of a set S contains every object that is not in S, and does not contain any object that
is in S.

Complement sets are infinite, so they can't be iterated over, and calling @code{arb} or @code{size}
on one is an error, but some operations are available on them.  They can be unioned, intersected,
@i{etc.} with each other and with normal sets.

I don't think of complement sets as adding much functionality; they are mostly just a notational
convenience.  One thing they do add is a representation of the @dfn{full set}, the set containing
everything, which is sometimes handy, being the identity element for the intersection operation.

@anchor{Type complement-set}
@deftp {Data type} complement-set
A representation of the complement of a normal, enumerated set.  Subclass of @code{set}.

Complement sets are printed as a tilde (@code{~}) followed by the set they're the complement of.
@end deftp

@defun complement-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is a complement set.
@end defun

@deffn Method {complement (set)} @ s
Returns a @code{complement-set} whose complement is @var{s}.

(This is consistent with @code{cl:complement}, which complements a boolean function, because a set
can be considered as a boolean function.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {complement (complement-set)} @ cs
Returns the normal set of which @var{cs} is the complement.
@end deffn

@anchor{Function full-set}
@defun full-set
Returns the full set, the complement of the empty set.
@end defun

@deffn Method {contains? (complement-set)} @ cs x
@deffnx Method {with (complement-set)} @ cs x
@deffnx Method {less (complement-set)} @ cs x
@deffnx Method {union (complement-set complement-set)} @ cs1 cs2
@deffnx Method {union (complement-set set)} @ cs1 s2
@deffnx Method {union (set complement-set)} @ s1 cs2
@deffnx Method {intersection (complement-set complement-set)} @ cs1 cs2
@deffnx Method {intersection (complement-set set)} @ cs1 s2
@deffnx Method {intersection (set complement-set)} @ s1 cs2
@deffnx Method {union (complement-set complement-set)} @ cs1 cs2
@deffnx Method {union (complement-set set)} @ cs1 s2
@deffnx Method {union (set complement-set)} @ s1 cs2
@deffnx Method {set-difference (complement-set complement-set)} @ cs1 cs2
@deffnx Method {set-difference (complement-set set)} @ cs1 s2
@deffnx Method {set-difference (set complement-set)} @ s1 cs2
@deffnx Method {subset? (complement-set complement-set)} @ cs1 cs2
@deffnx Method {subset? (complement-set set)} @ cs1 s2
@deffnx Method {subset? (set complement-set)} @ s1 cs2
@deffnx Method {disjoint? (complement-set complement-set)} @ cs1 cs2
@deffnx Method {disjoint? (complement-set set)} @ cs1 s2
@deffnx Method {disjoint? (set complement-set)} @ s1 cs2
@deffnx Method {bag-product (bag complement-set)} @ b cs
@deffnx Method {bag-product (complement-set bag)} @ cs b
The operations available on complement sets.  (I've added the two @code{bag-product} methods because
the full set is the identity value for the bag product operation: it contains every value with
multiplicity 1.)
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Maps
@section Maps

A map is an unordered collection of keys without duplicates, each key having an associated value;
with efficient operations to add a key/value pair, remove a key with its value, and to retrieve the
value for a key.  Adding a key/value pair to a map that already contains it, or removing a key from
a map that does not contain it, result in the same map.

Although maps are conceptually unordered, FSet imposes an order for its own purposes.  The WB
implementation allows you to @href{Custom Comparison and Hash Functions, control} this ordering.

Maps have default values that are returned by a @code{lookup} on a key that is not in the map;
@pxref{Map and Seq Defaults}.

The default implementation of maps is currently CHAMP (@code{ch-map}).  The WB implementation
(@code{wb-map}) is also available.

The implementation-specific map constructor functions and macros accept two @href{Custom Comparison
and Hash Functions, comparison functions}, one for the keys and one for the values.  The importance
of the former should be obvious, but you might wonder why the latter is needed.  FSet uses it in a
few ways:

@itemize
@item
Detecting a redundant @code{with} operation, where the key/value pair being added is already in the
map

@item
Constructing the value of the @code{range} operation, that returns all the values as a set

@item
Constructing the result of @code{map-difference} and  @code{map-difference-2}
@end itemize

In most cases, you can just let the value comparison function default to @code{compare}.
Occasionally, though, you might need this:

@defun eql-compare a b
Returns @code{:equal} if @var{a} and @var{b} are equal by @code{eql}; otherwise @code{:unequal}.
This can be supplied as a value comparison function for a map when the range type is one not handled
by FSet, such as CL hash tables or function objects.  It is @emph{not recommended} for comparing set
or bag values or map keys, as it imposes no ordering, and its associated hash function always
returns 0; if you used it for one of those purposes, FSet would fall back to using lists with linear
search.
@end defun

@hrule{}

@deftp {Data type} map
The abstract class for FSet functional maps.  Subclass of @code{collection}.
@end deftp

@defun map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional map.
@end defun

@deftp {Data type} transient-map
The abstract class for FSet transient maps.  Subclass of @code{transient-collection}.
@end deftp

@defun transient-map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient map.
@end defun

@defun empty-map @r{&key} @r{(@var{default} @code{nil})} no-default?
Constructor function.  Returns an empty map of the default implementation, currently @code{ch-map},
and the default organization.  If @var{default} is supplied, that will be the map's @href{Map and
Seq Defaults, default}; if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no default.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro map}
@defmac map @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a map of the default implementation, currently @code{ch-map}, and the
default organization, according to the supplied argument subforms.  Each argument subform can be a
list of the form @code{(@var{key-expr} @var{value-expr})}, denoting a mapping from the value of
@var{key-expr} to the value of @var{value-expr}; or a list of the form @code{($ @var{expression})},
in which case the expression must evaluate to a map, denoting all its mappings; or the symbol
@code{:default}, followed by a form; or the symbol @code{:no-default}.  If @code{:default} is
supplied, the map's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} is the value of the subsequent form; if
@code{:no-default} is supplied, the map has no default; if neither, the map's default is @code{nil}.

As a convenience, if a subform is @code{($ @var{expression})} and the expression evaluates to
@code{nil}, it will be treated as an empty map.  The result is constructed from the denoted mappings
in left-to-right order; so if a given key is supplied by more than one argument subform, its
associated value will be given by the rightmost such subform.
@end defmac

@anchor{Type ch-map}
@deftp {Data type} ch-map
Functional maps implemented using CHAMP trees.  Subclass of @code{map}.  These print as:

@example
##@{| (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1}) ... |@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]/@i{default}
@end example

Note the double @code{#}, which indicates CHAMP, and the vertical bars (``pipes'' in Unix-speak)
just inside the braces, which indicate a map.  The comparison functions are printed only if they
are not @code{compare}.  The default is printed only if it is not @code{nil}; if the map has no
default, @code{/[no default]} is printed.
@end deftp

@defun ch-map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional CHAMP map.
@end defun

@defun empty-ch-map @r{&key} @r{(@var{default} @code{nil})} no-default? key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty @code{ch-map}.  If @var{default} is supplied, that will be
the map's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default}; if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no
default.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols
naming the comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (these default to
@code{compare}).  A hash function must have been defined for each comparison function using
@href{Macro define-hash-function, @code{define-hash-function}}.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro ch-map}
@defmac ch-map @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{ch-map} according to the supplied argument subforms.  See
@href{Macro map, @code{map}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@defmac ch-custom-map key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{ch-map} with a custom organization according to the supplied
argument subforms.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name} must be symbols naming
the comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (you can use @code{nil} as a
synonym of @code{compare}).  A hash function must have been defined for each comparison function
using @href{Macro define-hash-function, @code{define-hash-function}}.

See @href{Macro map, @code{map}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Type wb-map}
@deftp {Data type} wb-map
Functional maps implemented using WB-trees.  Subclass of @code{map}.  These print as:

@example
#@{| (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1}) @dots{} |@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]/@i{default}
@end example

Note the single @code{#}, which indicates WB, and the vertical bars (``pipes'' in Unix-speak)
just inside the braces, which indicate a map.  The comparison functions are printed only if they are
not @code{compare}.  The default is printed only if it is not @code{nil}; if the map has no
default, @code{/[no default]} is printed.
@end deftp

@defun wb-map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional WB-tree map.
@end defun

@defun empty-wb-map @r{&key} @r{(@var{default} @code{nil})} no-default? key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty @code{wb-map}.  If @var{default} is supplied, that will be
the map's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default}; if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no
default.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols
naming the comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (these default to
@code{compare}).
@end defun

@anchor{Macro wb-map}
@defmac wb-map @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{wb-map} according to the supplied argument subforms.  See
@href{Macro map, @code{map}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@defmac wb-custom-map key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{wb-map} with a custom organization according to the supplied
argument subforms.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name} must be symbols naming
the comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (you can use @code{nil} as a
synonym of @code{compare}).

See @href{Macro map, @code{map}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Map Operations
@subsection Map Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (map)} @ m
Returns true iff the map is empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {empty-map-like (map)} @ m
Returns an empty map of the same type and organization, and with the same default, as @var{m}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (map)} @ m
Returns the number of key-value pairs in the map.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (map)} @ m
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} pair of the map.  Specifically, on a nonempty map, returns
three values: an arbitrary key, its associated value, and true; on an empty map, returns @code{nil},
@code{nil}, and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (map)} @ m k @r{&optional} v
If @var{v} is not supplied, returns true iff the domain of @var{m} contains @var{k}.  If @var{v} is
supplied, returns true iff @var{m} maps @var{k} to @var{v}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain-contains? (map)} @ m k
Returns true iff the domain of @var{m} contains @var{k}.  (This is now redundant with two-argument
@code{contains?}, and is mildly deprecated.  For most of FSet's history, @code{contains?} on a map
required three arguments; so it was all but useless, and you had to use @code{domain-contains?}
instead.  Fortunately, I finally came to my senses and fixed @code{contains?} to accept two
arguments.)  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {range-contains? (map)} @ m v
Returns true iff the range of @var{m} contains @var{v}, that is, if any key is mapped to @var{v}.
O(@i{n}) (requires a linear search).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (map)} @ m k
If @var{m} contains a key equal to @var{k}, according to its key comparison function, returns three
values: the corresponding value, true, and the key found; otherwise, the map's @href{Map and Seq
Defaults, default}, false, and @code{nil}.  If the key is not found and the map has no default,
signals an error of type @code{map-domain-error}.  O(log @i{n}).

@deffn {@code{setf} Expander} {setf lookup (map)} @ m k v
Invoked as @code{(setf (lookup @var{m} @var{k}) @var{v})}.  Updates the place @var{m} (which must
be @code{setf}-able) to have a new mapping from @var{k} to @var{v}.  Equivalent to @code{(setf
@var{m} (with @var{m} @var{k} @var{v}))}, except that subexpressions within @var{m} are evaluated
only once.

You can also write @code{(setf (@@ @var{m} @var{k}) @var{v})}.  @xref{The @code{@@} Macro}.
@end deffn
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with (map)} @ m k v
Returns a map, of the same class and organization as @var{m}, that contains all pairs of @var{m}
whose key is not equal to @var{k}, and also maps @var{k} to @var{v}.  If @var{m} already contained a
key equal to @var{k}, and the corresponding value is equal to @var{v} according to its value
comparison function, returns @var{m} itself.  (This is so you can find out whether the pair was
added or updated simply by calling @code{eq} on @var{m} and the result.)

@defmac includef m k v
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{with}.  If place @var{m}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a map, updates it so the map now maps @var{k} to @var{v}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less (map)} @ m k
Returns a map, of the same class and organization as @var{m}, that contains all pairs of @var{m}
whose key is not equal to @var{k}.  If @var{m} did not contain a key equal to @var{k}, according to
its comparison function, returns @var{m} itself.  (This is so you can find out whether the pair was
removed simply by calling @code{eq} on @var{} and the result.)

@defmac excludef m k
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{less}.  If place @var{m}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a map, updates it so the map does not contain a key @var{k}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {default (map)} @ m
If the map has a default, returns it and a true second value; otherwise, returns @code{nil} and
false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with-default (map)} @ m new-default
Returns a new map that has all the pairs of @var{m}, but whose default is @var{new-default}.  O(1).

@deffn {@code{setf} Expander} default @ m new-default
@code{(setf (default @var{m}) @var{new-default})} is equivalent to @code{(setf @var{m} (with-default
@var{m} @var{new-default}))}, except that subexpressions within @var{m} are evaluated only once.
@end deffn
@end deffn

@deffn Method {without-default (map)} @ m
Returns a new map that has all the pairs of @var{m}, but has no default.  O(1).

@defmac clear-default m
@code{(clear-default @var{m})} is equivalent to @code{(setf @var{m} (without-default @var{m}))},
except that subexpressions within @var{m} are evaluated only once.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {index (map)} @ m k
If @var{m} contains key @var{k}, returns the index of @var{k} within the ordering of @var{m}; otherwise
@code{nil}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-index (map)} @ m idx
Returns the pair at index @var{idx} within the ordering of @var{m}.  (On a @code{wb-map}, this is
the same as @code{at-rank}.)  @var{rank} must be in [0 .. size(s)); otherwise, signals an error of
type @code{simple-type-error}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain (map)} @ m
Returns the domain (set of keys) of @var{m}, as a set of the same implementation (WB or CHAMP), and
using @var{m}'s key ordering as its ordering.  O(@i{n}), but with a relatively small constant
factor.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {range (map)} @ m
Returns the range of @var{m} (the set of values to which any key is mapped), as a set of the same
implementation (WB or CHAMP), and using @var{m}'s value ordering as its ordering.  O(@i{n} log
@i{n}).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method map-union (map map)}
@deffn Method {map-union (map map)} @ m1 m2 @r{&optional} val-fn
Returns a map containing all the keys of @var{m1} and @var{m2}, where the value for each key
contained in only one map is the value from that map, and the value for each key contained in both
maps is the result of calling @var{val-fn} on the value from @var{m1} and the value from @var{m2}.
@var{val-fn} defaults to simply returning its second argument, so the entries in @var{m2} simply
shadow those in @var{m1}.  The @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} for the new map is: if both maps
have defaults, the result of calling @var{val-fn} on those defaults; if only one map has a default,
that default; otherwise none.

@code{map-union} assumes that @var{val-fn} is idempotent, @i{i.e.}, if the two values passed to
@var{val-fn} are equal, @var{val-fn} must return the same value; it often elides calls to
@var{val-fn} on that basis.

If @var{val-fn} returns the symbol @code{:no-value} as a second value, the result will contain no
pair with the corresponding key.

Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of equal keys in the two maps, the
result contains the instance that was in @var{m1}; the associated value, if the two values are
equal, is also that in @var{m1}.

@href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@anchor{Method map-intersection (map map)}
@deffn Method {map-intersection (map map)} @ m1 m2 @r{&optional} val-fn
Returns a map containing all the keys that are in the domains of both @var{m1} and @var{m2}, where
the value for each key is the result of calling @var{val-fn} on the value from @var{m1} and the
value from @var{m2}.  @var{val-fn} defaults to simply returning its second argument, so the entries
in @var{m2} simply shadow those in @var{m1}.  The @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} for the new
map is the result of calling @var{val-fn} on the defaults for the two maps, if they both have
defaults; else none.

@code{map-intersection} assumes that @var{val-fn} is idempotent, @i{i.e.}, if the two values passed
to @var{val-fn} are equal, @var{val-fn} must return the same value; it often elides calls to
@var{val-fn} on that basis.

If @var{val-fn} returns @code{:no-value} as a second value, the result will contain no pair with the
corresponding key.

Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of equal keys in the two maps, the
result contains the instance that was in @var{m1}; the associated value, if the two values are
equal, is also that in @var{m1}.

@href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {map-difference (map map)} @ m1 m2
Returns a map containing all the pairs that are in @var{m1} but not @var{m2}.

The default for the returned map is that of @var{m1}, if it has a default, except if the defaults
are equal, in which case the returned map has no default.

@href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {map-difference-2 (map map)} @ m1 m2
Returns, as two values: a map containing all the pairs that are in @var{m1} but not @var{m2}, and
one containing all the pairs that are in @var{m2} but not @var{m1}.

The default for each returned map is that of its corresponding argument, if it has a default, except
if the defaults are equal, in which case neither returned map has a default.

@href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {restrict (map set)} @ m s
Returns a map containing only those pairs of @var{m} whose keys are also in @var{s}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {restrict-not (map set)} @ m s
Returns a map containing only those pairs of @var{m} whose keys are @emph{not} also in @var{s}.
@end deffn

@anchor{Macro do-map}
@defmac do-map @r{(@var{x} @var{y} @var{map} &optional @var{value}) &body} body
For each key/value pair of @var{map}, binds @var{x} to the key and @var{y} to the value and executes
@var{body}.  When done, returns @var{value} if supplied, otherwise @code{nil}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Method iterator (map)}
@deffn Method {iterator (map)} @ m
Returns a @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator} over the map @var{m}.  The @code{:get}
operation returns three values: if there is another key/value pair remaining, returns it as two
values and a true third value, else two @code{nil} values and false.  Creating an iterator takes
O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:get} operation is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method fun-iterator (map)}
@deffn Method {fun-iterator (map)} @ m
Returns a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator} over the map @var{m}.  The @code{:first}
operation returns three values: if the iterator is not empty, returns the first key/value pair as
two values and a true third value, else two @code{nil} values and false.  Creating an iterator takes
O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:first} operation is O(1), and @code{:rest} is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {filter (function map)} @ pred m
@deffnx Method {filter (symbol map)} @ pred m
Returns a new map, of the same type and organization as @var{m}, containing only those pairs that
satisfy @var{pred}.  @var{pred} may be specified as a function or an fbound symbol.  O(@i{n}
⋅ tc(@var{pred})) + O(@i{r} log @i{r}), where tc(@var{pred}) is the time complexity of @var{pred}
and @i{r} is the size of the result.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {map-image (function map)} @ f m @r{&key} key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name default no-default?
@deffnx Method {map-image (symbol map)} @ f m @r{&key} key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name default no-default?
Returns a map containing the result of applying @var{fn} to each pair of @var{m}.  That is, @var{fn}
is called with both the domain and range values as arguments; it is expected to return two values,
which become the new domain and range values.  @var{fn} may be specified as a function or an fbound
symbol.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, control the
organization of the result; the default for each is the corresponding property of @var{m}.  The
default of the returned map is @code{nil} unless a different default is specified by @var{default},
or @var{no-default?} is true.

See also @code{compose}, below.

@defmac map-imagef m fn
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{map-image}.  If place @var{m}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a map, updates it so the place now contains the image of the
map under @var{fn}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {reduce (function map)} @ fn m @r{&key} key @r{(@var{initial-value} nil)}
@deffnx Method {reduce (symbol map)} @ fn m @r{&key} key @r{(@var{initial-value} nil)}
Calls @var{fn} repeatedly with three arguments, a state variable and the next key/value pair of
@var{m}, storing the result of each call back into the state variable, and finally returning that
result.  If @var{initial-value} is supplied, it is used as the initial value of the state variable.
Otherwise: if @var{m} is nonempty, the initial value is the first element; if @var{m} is empty, the
result of @code{reduce} is obtained by calling @var{fn} with no arguments.  In all cases, if
@var{key} is provided, it is called on each key/value pair and the resulting two values used in
place of the pair.  (Time complexity depends on the behavior of @var{fn}.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {compose (map map)} @ m1 m2
@deffnx Method {compose (map function)} @ m1 f2
@deffnx Method {compose (map symbol)} @ m1 f2
@deffnx Method {compose (map seq)} @ m1 s2
Composes a map with another map, a function (possibly specified as an fbound symbol), or a seq
(considered as a map from indices to elements).  That is, for each pair in @var{m1}, the result maps
its key to the result of invoking @var{m2}, @var{f2}, or @var{s2} to its value.  If @var{m1} has a
default, the value of invoking the second argument on that default becomes the default of the
returned map.

In the (map map) and (map seq) cases, takes O(@i{m} log @i{n}) time, where @i{m} is the size of
@var{m1} and @i{n} is the size of @var{m2} or @var{s2}.  In the function cases, it obviously depends
on the behavior of the function; it will be called @i{m} times.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find (t map)} @ item m @r{&key} key test
Scans linearly through the keys of @var{m} to find an element that matches @var{item} according to
@var{key} and @var{test}.  For each element of @var{s}, @var{key}, a function that defaults to the
identity function, is called on it, and then @var{test} is called on @var{item} and the result; if
it returns true, @code{find} returns two values, the element and its associated value.  If no match
is found, @code{find} returns two @code{nil} values.  @var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not
@code{eql}.

Normally O(@i{n}), but as a special case, if @var{test} is @code{equal?}, @var{key} is not supplied,
and the map's key comparison function is @code{compare}, this does an O(log @i{n}) lookup.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find-if (t map)} @ pred m @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through the keys of @var{m} to find one for which the result of calling @var{key} on it
satisfies @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key}
defaults to the identity function.  Returns two values, the key found and its associated value, or
two @code{nil} values if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find-if-not (t map)} @ pred m @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through the keys of @var{m} to find one for which the result of calling @var{key} on
it does not satisfy @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.
@var{key} defaults to the identity function.  Returns two values, the key found and its associated
value, or two @code{nil} values if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count (t map)} @ item m @r{&key} key test
Scans linearly through the keys of @var{m}, counting the number that match @var{item} according to
@var{key} and @var{test}.  For each key of @var{m}, @var{key} is called on it, and then @var{test}
is called on @var{item} and the result; if it returns true, the key is counted.  Returns the count.
@var{key} and @var{test} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity
function; @var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.

Normally O(@i{n}), but as a special case, if @var{test} is @code{equal?}, @var{key} is not supplied,
and the map's key comparison function is @code{compare}, this does an O(log @i{n}) lookup to return
1 or 0.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count-if (t map)} @ pred m @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through the keys of @var{m} to count those for which the result of calling @var{key} on
them satisfies @var{pred}.  Returns the count.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be functions or fbound
symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count-if-not (t map)} @ pred m @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through the keys of @var{m} to count those for which the result of calling @var{key} on
them does not satisfy @var{pred}.  Returns the count.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be functions or
fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node CH-Map Operations
@subsection CH-Map Operations

CHAMP maps support @href{Transients, transients}.

@deffn Method {make-transient (ch-map)} @ m @r{&key} synchronized?
Makes a @code{transient-ch-map} whose initial contents are those of @var{m}.  If
@code{synchronized?} is true, all operations on the transient will be serialized via locking;
otherwise, the transient is not thread-safe.
@end deffn

@anchor{Type transient-ch-map}
@deftp {Data type} transient-ch-map
A transient CHAMP map.  Subclass of @code{transient-map}.  These print simply as:

@example
#<TRANSIENT-CH-MAP @i{id}>
@end example

where @i{id} is a serial number to identify the instance.
@end deftp

@defun transient-ch-map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient CHAMP map.
@end defun

@hrule{}

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Transient-CH-Map Operations
@subsection Transient-CH-Map Operations

Note that although you can use either @code{lookup} or @code{lookup!} to retrieve a value from a
transient map, and either @code{default} or @code{default!} to read its default, only the forms
ending in @code{!} can be used as a @code{setf} place.

@deffn Method  {empty? (transient-ch-map)} @ tm
Returns true iff @var{tm} is currently empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (transient-ch-map)} @ tm
Returns the current number of elements in @var{tm}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (transient-ch-map)} @ tm
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} element of the current contents of @var{tm}.  Specifically,
on a nonempty map, returns three values: an arbitrary key, its value, and true; on an empty map,
returns @code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (transient-ch-map)} @ tm key @r{&optional} value
Returns true iff @var{key} is currently a key of @var{tm}, and if @var{value} is supplied, it is the
corresponding value.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {clear! (transient-ch-map)} @ tm
Removes all elements from @var{tm}, resetting it to the empty state.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {include! (transient-ch-map)} @ tm key value
Modifies @var{tm} so that it maps @var{key} to @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the
case.  Returns @var{tm}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {exclude! (transient-ch-map)} @ tm key
Modifies @var{tm} so that it does not contain a mapping for @var{key}.  Has no effect if this was
already the case.  Returns @var{tm}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (transient-ch-map)} @ tm key
@deffnx Method {lookup! (transient-ch-map)} @ tm key
If @var{tm} currently contains a key equal to @var{k}, according to its key comparison function, returns three
values: the corresponding value, true, and the key found; otherwise, the map's @href{Map and Seq
Defaults, default}, false, and @code{nil}.  If the key is not found and the map has no default,
signals an error of type @code{map-domain-error}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {setf lookup! (t transient-ch-map)} @ value tm key
Invoked as @code{(setf (lookup! @var{tm} @var{key}) @var{value})}.  Modifies @var{tm} so that it
maps @var{key} to @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the case.  Returns @var{value}
(the CL spec for @code{setf} requires this).  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {default (transient-ch-map)} @ tm
@deffnx Method {default! (transient-ch-map)} @ tm
Returns the @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} associated with @var{tm}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {setf default! (transient-ch-map)} @ tm new-default
Invoked as @code{(setf (default! @var{tm}) @var{new-default})}.  Changes the default associated with
@var{tm} to @var{new-default}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {clear-default! (transient-ch-map)} @ tm
Removes the default from @var{tm}.  Subsequent lookups using keys not in the domain of @var{tm} will
cause an error to be signalled.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {make-persistent (transient-ch-map)} @ tm @r{&key} copy?
Returns a persistent FSet @code{ch-map} (the usual kind, with functional semantics) with the
contents of @var{tm}.  Subsequent modifications to the transient are permitted, and of course will
not affect the persistent one.

This operation has two modes, depending on @var{copy?}.  If @var{copy?} is false (the default), it
takes O(1) time; but subsequent modifications to the transient will behave performance-wise as if a
new transient had been created.  If @var{copy?}  is true, the operation takes O(n) time, but
subsequent modifications to the transient will run at full speed.  Copying the collection also
compacts it, so it uses less heap space.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node WB-Map Operations
@subsection WB-Map Operations

These operations make use of the ordering of the map, as determined by its key comparison function.
They are not defined on CHAMP maps.

@deffn Method {rank (wb-map)} @ m x
If @var{m} contains key @var{x}, returns the rank of @var{x} in the ordering defined by the key
comparison function of @var{m}, and a true second value. If @var{x} is not in the map, the second
value is false, and the first value is the rank that @var{x} would have if it were added.  Note that
if there are keys that are unequal but equivalent to @var{x}, an arbitrary order will be imposed on
them for this purpose; but another collection that is @code{equal?} but not @code{eq} to this one
will in general order them differently.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-rank (wb-map)} @ m rank
Returns the pair whose rank is @var{rank}.  @var{rank} must be in [0 .. size(@var{m})).  Note that
if there are keys that are unequal but equivalent in @var{m}, an arbitrary order will be imposed on
them for this purpose; but another collection that is @code{equal?} but not @code{eq} to this one
will in general order them differently.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {least (wb-map)} @ m
If @var{m} is nonempty, returns the pair at rank 0 and a true third value; otherwise, @code{nil},
@code{nil}, and false.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {greatest (wb-map)} @ m
If @var{m} is nonempty, returns the pair with the largest rank and a true third value; otherwise,
@code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-from (wb-map)} @ m x
Returns the submap of @var{m} with keys greater than or equal to @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-above (wb-map)} @ m x
Returns the submap of @var{m} with keys strictly greater than @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}) in general;
O(1) if @var{x} is the first value of @code{(arb @var{m})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-through (wb-map)} @ m x
Returns the submap of @var{m} with keys less than or equal to @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-below (wb-map)} @ m x
Returns the submap of @var{m} with keys strictly less than @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}) in general; O(1)
if @var{x} is the result of @code{(arb @var{m})}.
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Bags
@section Bags

@cindex Multiplicity
A bag, also called a multiset, is an unordered collection of values that permits duplicates.  Each
element of the bag has an associated @dfn{multiplicity} (sometimes called ``count''), which is a
positive integer specifying the number of repetitions of the element in the bag.  As with a set,
there are efficient operations to add a specified number of repetitions of a value, to remove a
specified number of repetitions, to test whether the bag contains a value, and to retrieve the
multiplicity of a value.  Adding a value to a bag that already contains it adds the specified number
of repetitions to its multiplicity; removing subtracts the number of repetitions removed, but once
all repetitions are removed, further removals have no effect (multiplicities are never negative).

Although bags are conceptually unordered, FSet imposes an order for its own purposes.  The WB
implementation allows you to @href{Custom Comparison and Hash Functions, control} this ordering.

There are two ways to iterate over bags: as single elements with each element repeated a number of
times equal to its multiplicity, or as pairs of an element and its multiplicity.

Many of the bag operations accept a set in place of a bag, treating it as a bag where every element
has multiplicity 1.

The default implementation of bags is currently CHAMP (@code{ch-bag}).  The WB implementation
(@code{wb-bag}) is also available.

@deftp {Data type} bag
The abstract class for FSet functional bags.  Subclass of @code{collection}.
@end deftp

@defun bag? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional bag.
@end defun

@deftp {Data type} transient-bag
The abstract class for FSet transient bags.  Subclass of @code{transient-collection}.
@end deftp

@defun transient-bag? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient bag.
@end defun

@defun empty-bag
Constructor function.  Returns an empty bag of the default implementation, currently @code{ch-bag},
and the default organization.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro bag}
@defmac bag @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a bag of the default implementation, currrenlty @code{ch-bag}, and
the default organization, according to the supplied argument subforms.  Each argument subform can be
an expression, whose value will be added to the bag with multiplicity 1; or a list of the form
@code{($ @var{expression})}, in which case the expression must evaluate to a bag (or a set), whose
elements are added to the result bag with the specified multiplicities (1, if it's a set); or a list
of the form @code{(% @var{value} @var{multiplicity})}, which adds the value to the bag with the
specified multiplicity.
@end defmac

@anchor{Type ch-bag}
@deftp {Data type} ch-bag
Functional bags implemented using CHAMP trees.  Subclass of @code{bag}.  These print as:

@example
##@{% @i{e0} #%(@i{e1 m1}) ... %@}[@i{compare-fn}]
@end example

Note the double @code{#}, which indicates CHAMP.  Elements with multiplicity 1 are printed
unadorned; elements with higher multiplicity are printed followed by their multiplicity, wrapped in
@code{#%(@dots{})}.  The comparison function is printed only if it is not @code{compare}.
@end deftp

@defun ch-bag? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional CHAMP bag.
@end defun

@defun empty-ch-bag @r{&key} compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty ch-bag.  By default, it will be ordered by @code{compare}.
To use a custom ordering, supply the comparison function name (a symbol) as @code{compare-fn-name};
a hash function must have been defined for it using @href{Macro define-hash-function,
@code{define-hash-function}}.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro ch-bag}
@defmac ch-bag @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{ch-bag} according to the supplied argument subforms.  See
@href{Macro bag, @code{bag}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@defmac ch-custom-bag compare-fn-name @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{ch-bag} with a custom organization, according to the supplied
argument subforms.  @code{compare-fn-name} must be a symbol naming the desired comparison function;
a hash function must have been defined for it using @href{Macro define-hash-function,
@code{define-hash-function}}.  See @href{Macro bag, @code{bag}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of
@var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Type wb-bag}
@deftp {Data type} wb-bag
Functional bags implemented using WB-trees.  Subclass of @code{bag}.  These print as:

@example
#@{% @i{e0} #%(@i{e1 m1}) ... %@}[@i{compare-fn}]
@end example

Note the single @code{#}, which indicates WB.  Elements with multiplicity 1 are printed unadorned;
elements with higher multiplicity are printed followed by their multiplicity, wrapped in
@code{#%(@dots{})}.  The comparison function is printed only if it is not @code{compare}.
@end deftp

@defun wb-bag? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional WB-tree bag.
@end defun

@defun empty-wb-bag @r{&key} compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty wb-bag.  By default, it will be ordered by @code{compare}.
To use a custom ordering, supply the comparison function name (a symbol) as @code{compare-fn-name};
a hash function must have been defined for it using @href{Macro define-hash-function,
@code{define-hash-function}}.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro wb-bag}
@defmac wb-bag @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{wb-bag} according to the supplied argument subforms.  See
@href{Macro bag, @code{bag}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@defmac wb-custom-bag compare-fn-name @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{wb-bag} with a custom organization, according to the supplied
argument subforms.  @code{compare-fn-name} must be a symbol naming the desired comparison function.
See @href{Macro bag, @code{bag}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Bag Operations
@subsection Bag Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (bag)} @ b
Returns true iff @var{b} is empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {empty-bag-like (bag)} @ c
@deffnx Method {empty-bag-like (set)} @ c
Returns an empty bag of the same type and organization as @var{c}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (bag)} @ b
Returns the total multiplicity of the elements of @var{b}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {set-size (bag)} @ b
Returns the number of unique elements in @var{b}; that is, the size of a set containing its
elements.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (bag)} @ b
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} element of @var{b}, with its multiplicity.  Specifically, on
a nonempty bag, returns three values: an arbitrary element, its multiplicity, and true; on an empty
set, returns @code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (bag)} @ b x @r{&optional (@var{mult} 1)}
Returns true iff @var{x} is an element of @var{b}, with multiplicity of at least @var{mult}.
O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {multiplicity (bag)} @ b x
@deffnx Method {lookup (bag)} @ b x
If @var{b} contains @var{x}, returns two values, its multiplicity and the element found; else 0 and
@code{nil}.  O(log @i{n}).  (The @code{lookup} method is provided as a convenience; because it is
provided, you can also use @href{The @code{@@} Macro, the @code{@@} macro}.)

@deffn Method {multiplicity (set)} @ s x
Convenience method.  If @var{s} contains @var{x}, returns two values, 1 and the instance found; else
0 and @code{nil}.  O(log @i{n}).  (Note that @code{multiplicity} returns an integer first value on
both bags and sets, but @code{lookup} on a set returns a boolean.)
@end deffn
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with (bag)} @ b x @r{&optional (@var{mult} 1)}
Returns a bag, of the same class and organization as @var{b}, that contains @var{mult} more
repetitions of @var{x}.  That is, if @var{x} was not an element of @var{b}, the result contains it
with multiplicity @var{mult}; if it was an element, the result contains it with its multiplicity in
@var{b} plus @var{mult}.

@defmac includef b x @r{&optional (@var{mult} 1)}
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{with}.  If place @var{b} holds
a bag, updates it so the bag now contains @var{mult} more repetitions of @var{x}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less (bag)} @ b x @r{&optional (@var{mult} 1)}
Returns a bag, of the same class and organization as @var{b}, that contains @var{mult} fewer
repetitions of @var{x}, but not fewer than zero.  That is, if @var{b} contains @var{x} with
multiplicity less than or equal to @var{mult}, the result does not contain @var{x}; if greater, the
result contains @var{x} with it multiplicity in @var{b} minus @var{mult}.

@defmac excludef b x @r{&optional (@var{mult} 1)}
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{less}.  If place @var{b}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a bag, updates it so the bag now contains @var{mult} fewer
repetitions of @var{x} (but not fewer than zero).
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {index (bag)} @ b x
If @var{b} contains @var{x}, returns the index of @var{x} within the ordering of @var{b}; otherwise
@code{nil}.  This ordering ignores multiplicities, counting each element once.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-index (bag)} @ b idx
Returns, as two values the element at index @var{idx} within the ordering of @var{b}, and its
multiplicity.  (On a @code{wb-bag}, this is the same as @code{at-rank}.)  @var{idx} must be in [0
.. size(s)); otherwise, signals an error of type @code{simple-type-error}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method union (bag bag)}
@deffn Method {union (bag bag)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {union (bag set)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {union (set bag)} @ b1 b2
Returns a bag of the same type and organization as @var{b1}, that contains all elements that are in
either @var{b1} or @var{b2}, with the multiplicity of each equal to its maximum multiplicity in the
two bags.  A set can be supplied for one of the bags; its elements are treated as having
multiplicity 1.  Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of equal objects
in the two bags or sets, the result contains the instance that was in @var{b1}.  @href{Notes on Time
Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@anchor{Method bag-sum (bag bag)}
@deffn Method {bag-sum (bag bag)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {bag-sum (bag set)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {bag-sum (set bag)} @ b1 b2
Returns a bag of the same type and organization as @var{b1}, that contains all elements that are in
either @var{b1} or @var{b2}, with the multiplicity of each equal to the sum of its multiplicities in the
two bags.  A set can be supplied for one of the bags; its elements are treated as having
multiplicity 1.  Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of equal objects
in the two bags or sets, the result contains the instance that was in @var{b1}.  @href{Notes on Time
Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@anchor{Method intersection (bag bag)}
@deffn Method {intersection (bag bag)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {intersection (bag set)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {intersection (set bag)} @ b1 b2
Returns a bag of the same type and organization as @var{b1}, that contains all elements that are in
both @var{b1} and @var{b2}, with the multiplicity of each equal to its minimum multiplicity in the
two bags.  A set can be supplied for one of the bags; its elements are treated as having
multiplicity 1, and the result will be returned as a set.  Implements @href{Left Preference, left
preference}: for any pair of equal objects in the two bags or sets, the result contains the instance
that was in @var{b1}.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@anchor{Method bag-product (bag bag)}
@deffn Method {bag-product (bag bag)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {bag-product (bag set)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {bag-product (set bag)} @ b1 b2
Returns a bag of the same type and organization as @var{b1}, that contains all elements that are in
both @var{b1} and @var{b2}, with the multiplicity of each equal to the product of its multiplicities
in the two bags.  A set can be supplied for one of the bags; its elements are treated as having
multiplicity 1.  Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of equal objects
in the two bags or sets, the result contains the instance that was in @var{b1}.  @href{Notes on Time
Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {bag-difference (bag bag)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {bag-difference (bag set)} @ b1 b2
@deffnx Method {bag-difference (set bag)} @ b1 b2
Returns a bag of the same type and organization as @var{b1}, that contains all elements that are in
@var{b1} with greater multiplicity than they occur in @var{b2} with; the multiplicity of each is
that in @var{b1} minus that in @var{b2}.  A set can be supplied for one of the bags; its elements
are treated as having multiplicity 1, and if @var{b1} is a set, the result will be returned as a
set.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {subbag? (bag bag)} @ b1 b2
Returns true iff every element of @var{b1} is also in @var{b2}, with its multiplicity in @var{b1}
being greater than or equal to that in @var{b2}.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally
O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@defun proper-subbag? b1 b2
Returns true iff every element of @var{b1} is also in @var{b2}, with its multiplicity in @var{b1}
being greater than or equal to that in @var{b2}, and @var{b1} is smaller (in total multiplicity)
than @var{b2}.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity, Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end defun

@deffn Method {disjoint? (bag bag)} @ b1 b2
Returns true iff @var{b1} and @var{b2} have no elements in common.  @href{Notes on Time Complexity,
Normally O(@i{n})}.
@end deffn

@anchor{Macro do-bag}
@defmac do-bag @r{(@var{x} @var{bag} &optional @var{value}) &body} body
For each element of @var{bag}, binds @var{x} to it and executes @var{body} repeatedly, as many
times as the element's multiplicity.  When done, returns @var{value} if supplied, otherwise
@code{nil}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Macro do-bag-pairs}
@defmac do-bag-pairs @r{(@var{x} @var{n} @var{bag} &optional @var{value}) &body} body
For each element of @var{bag}, binds @var{x} to it and @var{n} to its multiplicity, and executes
@var{body} once.  When done, returns @var{value} if supplied, otherwise @code{nil}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Method iterator (bag)}
@deffn Method {iterator (bag)} @ b @r{&key} pairs?
Returns a @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator} over the bag @var{b}.  Creating an iterator
takes O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:get} operation is amortized O(1).

If @var{pairs?} is false, the @code{:get} operation returns two values: if there is another element
repetition remaining, returns it and true; else @code{nil} and false.  Yields each element a number
of times equal to its multiplicity;

If @var{pairs?} is true, the @code{:get} operation returns three values: if there is another element
remaining, returns it and its multiplicity as two values and a true third value, else @code{nil},
zero, and false.
@end deffn

@anchor{Method fun-iterator (bag)}
@deffn Method {fun-iterator (bag)} @ b
Returns a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator} over the bag @var{b}.  Creating an
iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:first} operation is O(1), and @code{:rest} is amortized
O(1).

If @var{pairs?} is false, the @code{:first} operation returns two values: if the iterator is not
empty, the first element and true; else @code{nil} and false.  Yields each element a number of times
equal to its multiplicity;

If @var{pairs?} is true, the @code{:first} operation returns three values: if the iterator is not
empty, returns the first element and its multiplicity as two values and a true third value, else
@code{nil}, zero, and false.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {filter (function bag)} @ pred b
@deffnx Method {filter (symbol bag)} @ pred b
@deffnx Method {filter (map bag)} @ pred b
Returns a new bag, of the same type and organization as @var{b}, containing only those elements that
satisfy @var{pred}, with the same multiplicity as they have in @var{b}.  @var{pred} must be a
function, an fbound symbol, or a boolean-valued map.  O(@i{n} ⋅ tc(@var{pred})) + O(@i{r} log
@i{r}), where tc(@var{pred}) is the time complexity of @var{pred} and @i{r} is the size of the
result.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {filter-pairs (function bag)} @ pred b
@deffnx Method {filter-pairs (symbol bag)} @ pred b
Returns a new bag, of the same type and organization as @var{b}, containing only those pairs that
satisfy @var{pred}.  That is, @var{pred} is called with each element and its multipilcity as two
arguments; if it returns true, the result will contain the element, with the same multipilcity.
@var{pred} must be a function or an fbound symbol.  O(@i{n} ⋅ tc(@var{pred})) + O(@i{r} log @i{r}),
where tc(@var{pred}) is the time complexity of @var{pred} and @i{r} is the size of the result.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {image (function bag)} @ fn b @r{&key} compare-fn-name
@deffnx Method {image (symbol bag)} @ fn  @r{&key} compare-fn-name
@deffnx Method {image (map bag)} @ fn b @r{&key} compare-fn-name
Returns a bag containing the values of @var{fn} applied to all the elements of @var{b}.  Since the
result is a bag, its elements will not necessarily correspond one-to-one to those of @var{b}; it
will impose its own ordering, and will have fewer distinct elements than @var{b} if @var{fn} returns
the same value on two or more elements of @var{b}.  The multiplicity of each element of the result
will be the sum of the multiplicities of the elements of @var{b} that @var{fn} mapped to it.

The result will be of the same type as @var{b}.  @var{compare-fn-name}, if supplied, will control
its organization; otherwise, that will also be the same as for @var{b}.  @var{fn} must be a
function, an fbound symbol, or a map.  O(@i{n} ⋅ tc(@var{fn})) + O(@i{r} log @i{r}), where
tc(@var{fn}) is the time complexity of @var{fn} and @i{r} is the size of the result.

@defmac imagef b fn
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{image}.  If place @var{b}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a bag, updates it so the place now contains the image of the
bag under @var{fn}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {reduce (function bag)} @ fn b @r{&key} key @r{(@var{initial-value} nil)} pairs?
@deffnx Method {reduce (symbol bag)} @ fn b @r{&key} key @r{(@var{initial-value} nil)} pairs?
If @var{pairs?} is false, calls @var{fn} repeatedly with two arguments, a state variable and the
next element repetition of @var{b}, storing the result of each call back into the state variable, and
finally returning that result.  In this mode, calls @var{fn} on each element a number of times equal
to the element's multiplicity.

If @var{pairs?} is true, calls @var{fn} repeatedly with three arguments, a state variable, the next
element of @var{b}, and the multiplicity of that element, storing the result of each call back into
the state variable, and finally returning that result.  In this mode, calls @var{fn} on each element
once.

If @var{initial-value} is supplied, it is used as the initial value of the state variable.
Otherwise: if @var{b} is nonempty, the initial value is the first element; if @var{s} is empty, the
result of @code{reduce} is obtained by calling @var{fn} with no arguments.  In all cases, if
@var{key} is provided, it is called on each element and the result used in place of the element.
(Time complexity depends on the behavior of @var{fn}.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find (t bag)} @ item b @r{&key} key test
Scans linearly through @var{b} to find an element that matches @var{item} according to @var{key} and
@var{test}.  For each (unique) element of @var{b}, @var{key}, a function that defaults to the
identity function, is called on it, and then @var{test} is called on @var{item} and the result; if
it returns true, @code{find} returns the element.  If no match is found, @code{find} returns
@code{nil}.  @var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.

Normally O(@i{n}), but as a special case, if @var{test} is @code{equal?}, @var{key} is not supplied,
and the bag's comparison function is @code{compare}, this does an O(log @i{n}) lookup.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find-if (t bag)} @ pred b @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through @var{b} to find an element for which the result of calling @var{key} on it
satisfies @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key}
defaults to the identity function.  Returns the element found, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find-if-not (t bag)} @ pred b @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through @var{b} to find an element for which the result of calling @var{key} on it
does not satisfy @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.
@var{key} defaults to the identity function.  Returns the element found, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count (t bag)} @ item b @r{&key} key test
Scans linearly through @var{b}, accumulating the total multiplicity of elements that match
@var{item} according to @var{key} and @var{test}.  For each element of @var{b}, @var{key} is called
on it, and then @var{test} is called on @var{item} and the result; if it returns true, the element's
multiplicity is added.  Returns the total.  @var{key} and @var{test} must be functions or fbound
symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function; @var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not
@code{eql}.

Normally O(@i{n}), but as a special case, if @var{test} is @code{equal?}, @var{key} is not supplied,
and the bag's comparison function is @code{compare}, this does an O(log @i{n}) lookup.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count-if (t bag)} @ pred b @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through @var{b} to accumulate the total multiplicity of elements for which the result
of calling @var{key} on them satisfies @var{pred}.  Returns the total.  @var{pred} and @var{key}
must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count-if-not (t bag)} @ pred b @r{&key} key
Scans linearly through @var{b} to accumulate the total multiplicity of elements for which the result
of calling @var{key} on them does not satisfy @var{pred}.  Returns the total.  @var{pred} and
@var{key} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node CH-Bag Operations
@subsection CH-Bag Operations

CHAMP bags support @href{Transients, transients}.

@deffn Method {make-transient (ch-bag)} @ b @r{&key} synchronized?
Makes a @code{transient-ch-bag} whose initial contents are those of @var{b}.  If
@code{synchronized?} is true, all operations on the transient will be serialized via locking;
otherwise, the transient is not thread-safe.
@end deffn

@anchor{Type transient-ch-bag}
@deftp {Data type} transient-ch-bag
A transient CHAMP bag.  Subclass of @code{transient-bag}.  These print simply as:

@example
#<TRANSIENT-CH-BAG @i{id}>
@end example

where @i{id} is a serial number to identify the instance.
@end deftp

@defun transient-ch-bag? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient CHAMP bag.
@end defun

@hrule{}

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Transient-CH-Bag Operations
@subsection Transient-CH-Bag Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb
Returns true iff @var{tb} is currently empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb
Returns the total multiplicity of the current elements of @var{tb}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {set-size (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb
Returns the number of unique elements currently in @var{tb}; that is, the size of a set containing
its elements.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} element of the current contents of @var{tb}.  Specifically,
on a nonempty bag, returns two values: an arbitrary element and true; on an empty bag, returns two
false values.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {multiplicity (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb x
@deffnx Method {lookup (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb x
If @var{tb} currently contains @var{x}, returns two values, its multiplicity and the instance found;
else 0 and @code{nil}.  O(log @i{n}).  (The @code{lookup} method is provided as a convenience;
because it is provided, you can also use the @code{@@} macro.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb x
Returns true iff @var{x} is currently an element of @var{tb}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {clear! (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb
Removes all elements from @var{tb}, resetting it to the empty state.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {include! (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb value
Modifies @var{tb} so that it contains @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the case.
Returns @var{tb}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {exclude! (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb value
Modifies @var{tb} so that it does not contain @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the
case.  Returns @var{tb}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {make-persistent (transient-ch-bag)} @ tb @r{&key} copy?
Returns a persistent FSet @code{ch-bag} (the usual kind, with functional semantics) with the
contents of @var{tb}.  Subsequent modifications to the transient are permitted, and of course will
not affect the persistent one.

This operation has two modes, depending on @var{copy?}.  If @var{copy?} is false (the default), it
takes O(1) time; but subsequent modifications to the transient will behave performance-wise as if a
new transient had been created.  If @var{copy?}  is true, the operation takes O(n) time, but
subsequent modifications to the transient will run at full speed.  Copying the collection also
compacts it, so it uses less heap space.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node WB-Bag Operations
@subsection WB-Bag Operations

These operations make use of the ordering of the bag, as determined by its comparison function.
They are not defined on CHAMP bags.

@deffn Method {rank (wb-bag)} @ s x
If @var{s} contains @var{x}, returns the rank of @var{x} in the ordering defined by the comparison
function of @var{s}, and a true second value. If @var{x} is not in the bag, the second value is
false, and the first value is the rank that @var{x} would have if it were added.  Note that if there
are values that are unequal but equivalent to @var{x}, an arbitrary order will be imposed on them
for this purpose; but another collection that is @code{equal?} but not @code{eq} to this one will in
general order them differently.  Multiplicities are ignored for this purpose.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-rank (wb-bag)} @ s rank
Returns the element whose rank is @var{rank}.  @var{rank} must be in [0 .. size(@var{m})).  Note
that if there are values that are unequal but equivalent in @var{s}, an arbitrary order will be
imposed on them for this purpose; but another collection that is @code{equal?} but not @code{eq} to
this one will in general order them differently.  Multiplicities are ignored for this purpose.
O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {least (wb-bag)} @ s
If @var{s} is nonempty, returns the element at rank 0 and a true second value; otherwise, @code{nil}
and false.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {greatest (wb-bag)} @ s
If @var{s} is nonempty, returns the element with the largest rank and a true second value;
otherwise, @code{nil} and false.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-from (wb-bag)} @ s x
Returns the subbag of @var{s} with elements greater than or equal to @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-above (wb-bag)} @ s x
Returns the subbag of @var{s} with elements strictly greater than @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}) in general;
O(1) if @var{x} is the result of @code{(arb @var{s})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-through (wb-bag)} @ s x
Returns the subbag of @var{s} with elements less than or equal to @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {split-below (wb-bag)} @ s x
Returns the subbag of @var{s} with elements strictly less than @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}) in general;
O(1) if @var{x} is the result of @code{(arb @var{s})}.
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Seqs
@section Seqs

A seq (pronounced ``seek'') is an ordered collection of elements, accessed by index rather than by
value.  Their functionality overlaps with that of CL sequences, but they have a different
performance profile.  Seqs are implemented as WB-trees, so accessing an element, updating one,
inserting one, removing one, extracting a subsequence, and concatenating two seqs all take O(log
@i{n}) time; this is in contrast to a CL vector, for which access and update are very fast O(1)
operations, but the rest all take linear time.  This makes seqs much more general, and more suitable
as a @emph{default} choice for a sequence datatype.

The O(log @i{n}) access time, in particular, seems to contrast poorly with the O(1) time you would
get with a Lisp vector.  However, it applies only when you're doing true random access into the seq,
which is a relatively rare case in practice.  More common is to iterate over the seq or a subrange
of it; using @href{Macro do-seq, @code{do-seq}} or the @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful} or
@href{Functional Iterators, functional} iterators, there is a logarithmic-time setup phase, but
after that the iteration takes amortized constant time per element.

Seqs are performance-symmetrical: operations at the head (@code{first}, @code{with-first},
@code{less-first}) take the same expected time as operations at the tail (@code{last},
@code{with-last}, @code{less-last}).  Furthermore, on seqs of more than a certain minimum size,
several elements at the head and several at the tail are stored separately from the tree, to make
these operations faster.  So seqs are perfectly usable as queues, stacks, or deques --- not as fast
as purpose-built mutable data structures, but fast enough for most use cases, even with millions of
elements.

Character strings are an important special case of CL vectors, and seqs have some special support
for them as well.  FSet's WB-trees are heterogeneous: instead of leaves holding single elements,
they hold short (@i{i.e.}, bounded-length) vectors of elements.  The seq implementation takes this
idea a step further: if all the elements of a vector are characters, the vector itself is a CL
string, which takes less space..  As a consequence, a seq containing only characters is reasonably
space-efficient; and adding a small number of non-characters to it doesn't reduce this efficiency
much --- the only leaf vectors that must become CL @code{simple-vector}s are those that actually
contain a non-character; the rest remain strings.

On implementations, including SBCL, that have two string types --- @code{base-string}, which holds
only @code{base-char}s and allocates 8 bits per character, and @code{string}, which holds Unicode
and allocates 32 bits per character --- FSet takes this one step further, using @code{base-string}s
wherever possible.

FSet also tracks whether a seq contains only characters, and prints it differently if so.  The
overall effect of these features is that using seqs is a very sound choice for tasks, such as HTML
generation, that require a lot of string manipulation.

Seqs have default values that are returned by a @code{lookup} on an out-of-bounds index; @pxref{Map
and Seq Defaults}.

Currently, seqs have only one implementation: @code{wb-seq}, using WB-trees.

@deftp {Data type} seq
The abstract class for FSet functional seqs.  Subclass of @code{collection}.
@end deftp

@defun seq? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional seq.
@end defun

@anchor{Type wb-seq}
@deftp {Data type} wb-seq
Functional seqs implemented using WB-trees.  Subclass of @code{seq}.  These print in two different
ways, depending on whether they are ``char seqs'', @i{i.e.}, they contain only characters.  Non-char
seqs use the general form:

@example
#[ @i{e0 e1} @dots{} ]/@i{default}
@end example

However, if there are subsequences of consecutive characters within a non-char seq, these are
printed as strings, preceded by @code{#$}.  The default is printed only if it is not @code{nil}; if
the map has no default, @code{/[no default]} is printed.

Char seqs are printed as strings, prefixed by @code{#}, and possibly also suffixed by a slash and
default, or @code{/[no default]}.  (Examples below.)
@end deftp

@defun wb-seq? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional WB-tree seq.
@end defun

@defun empty-seq @r{&key} @r{(@var{default} nil)} no-default?
@defunx empty-wb-seq @r{&key} @r{(@var{default} nil)} no-default?
Constructor function.  Returns an empty @code{wb-seq}.  If @var{default} is supplied, that will be
the seq's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default}; if @var{no-default?} is true, the seq will have no
default.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro seq}
@defmac seq @r{&rest} subforms
@defmacx wb-seq @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{wb-seq} according to the supplied argument subforms.  Each
argument subform can be an expression whose value is to appear in the sequence; or a list of the
form ($ @i{expression}), in which case the value of the expression is @href{Generic Function
@code{convert}, converted} to a seq, which is spliced into the result seq.  The order of the result
sequence reflects the order of the argument subforms.  If one of the arguments is @code{:default},
the seq's default is the value of the subsequent form; if one is @code{:no-default}, the seq has no
default; if neither, the seq's default is @code{nil}.  To include @code{:default} or
@code{:no-default} as an ordinary element, quote it.  Examples:

@example
> (seq 3 17)
#[ 3 17 ]
> (seq 3 17 :default 0)
#[ 3 17 ]/0
> (seq 3 17 :no-default)
#[ 3 17 ]/[no default]
> (seq 3 17 ':default)
#[ 3 17 :DEFAULT ]
> (defparameter *a-seq* (seq 3 17))
*A-SEQ*
> (seq 4 ($ *a-seq*) 8)
#[ 4 3 17 8 ]
> (seq 'foo #\b #\a #\r 'baz)
#[ FOO #$"bar" BAZ ]
> (seq #\f #\o #\o)
#"foo"
> (seq #\f #\o #\o :no-default)
#"foo"/[no default]
> (seq #\x ($ "yz") #\z #\y)
#"xyzzy"
@end example
@end defmac

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Seq Operations
@subsection Seq Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (seq)} @ s
Returns true iff the seq is empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (seq)} @ s
Returns the number of elements in the map.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {char-seq? (seq)} @ s
Returns true iff @var{s} is a char seq, @i{i.e.}, it contains only characters and is not empty.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (seq)} @ s idx
@deffnx Method {at-index (seq)} @ s idx
If @var{idx} is an integer in [0 .. size(@var{s})], returns two values: the element at that
position, and true.  Otherwise, returns the seq's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} and false; if
the seq has no default, signals an error of type @code{seq-bounds-error}.  O(log @i{n}).

For seqs, @code{at-index} is synonymous with @code{lookup}.

@deffn {@code{setf} Expander} {setf lookup (seq)} @ s idx v
Invoked as @code{(setf (lookup @var{s} @var{idx}) @var{v})}.  Updates the place @var{s} (which must
be @code{setf}-able) to have @var{v} at @var{idx}.  Equivalent to @code{(setf @var{s} (with @var{s}
@var{idx} @var{v}))}, except that subexpressions within @var{s} are evaluated only once.

You can also write @code{(setf (@@ @var{s} @var{idx}) @var{v})}.  @xref{The @code{@@} Macro}.
@end deffn
@end deffn

@deffn Method {default (seq)} @ s
If the seq has a default, returns it and a true second value; otherwise, returns @code{nil} and
false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with-default (seq)} @ s new-default
Returns a new seq that has all the pairs of @var{s}, but whose default is @var{new-default}.  O(1).

@deffn {@code{setf} Expander} default @ s new-default
@code{(setf (default @var{s}) @var{new-default})} is equivalent to @code{(setf @var{s} (with-default
@var{s} @var{new-default}))}, except that subexpressions within @var{s} are evaluated only once.
@end deffn
@end deffn

@deffn Method {without-default (seq)} @ s
Returns a new seq that has all the pairs of @var{s}, but has no default.  O(1).

@defmac clear-default s
@code{(clear-default @var{s})} is equivalent to @code{(setf @var{s} (without-default @var{s}))},
except that subexpressions within @var{s} are evaluated only once.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {first (seq)} @ s
If @var{s} is nonempty, returns its first element, that is, the one at index 0, and a true second
value.  Otherwise, returns the seq's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} and false; if the seq has
no default, signals an error of type @code{empty-seq-error}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with-first (seq)} @ s x
Returns a new seq of size one greater than that of @var{s}, with @var{x} inserted at index 0.  O(log
@i{n}), but with a relatively small constant factor, since it usually doesn't require walking the
tree.

@defmac push-first s x
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{with-first}.  Assuming place
@var{s} (which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a seq, updates @var{s} by inserting @var{x} at index
0.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less-first (seq)} @ s
If @var{s} is nonempty, returns a new seq of size one less than that of @var{s}, with the element at
index 0 removed.  Otherwise, returns the seq's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} and false; if
the seq has no default, signals an error of type @code{empty-seq-error}.  O(log @i{n}), but with a
relatively small constant factor, since it usually doesn't require walking the tree.

@defmac pop-first s
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, quasi-mutating macro}.  if place @var{s} (which must be
@code{setf}-able) holds a nonempty seq, returns its first element after updating @var{s} by removing
that element.  If @var{s} holds an empty seq, returns the seq's @href{Map and Seq Defaults,
default}; if the seq has no default, signals an error of type @code{empty-seq-error}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {last (seq)} @ s
If @var{s} is nonempty, returns its last element, that is, the one at index size(@var{s}) - 1, and a
true second value.  Otherwise, returns the seq's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} and false; if
the seq has no default, signals an error of type @code{empty-seq-error}.  O(1).  @xref{@code{first}
and @code{last}}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with-last (seq)} @ s x
Returns a new seq of size one greater than that of @var{s}, with @var{x} inserted after the last
element (@i{i.e.}, at index size(@var{s})).  O(log @i{n}), but with a relatively small constant factor,
since it usually doesn't require walking the tree.

@defmac push-last s x
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{with-last}.  Assuming place
@var{s} (which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a seq, updates @var{s} by inserting @var{x} after the
last element.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less-last (seq)} @ s
If @var{s} is nonempty, returns a new seq of size one less than that of @var{s}, with the element at
index 0 removed.  Otherwise, returns the seq's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} and false; if
the seq has no default, signals an error of type @code{empty-seq-error}.  O(log @i{n}), but with a
relatively small constant factor, since it usually doesn't require walking the tree.

@defmac pop-last s
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, quasi-mutating macro}.  if place @var{s} (which must be
@code{setf}-able) holds a nonempty seq, returns its last element after updating @var{s} by removing
that element.  If @var{s} holds an empty seq, returns the seq's @href{Map and Seq Defaults,
default}; if the seq has no default, signals an error of type @code{empty-seq-error}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with (seq)} @ s idx x
If @var{idx} is in [0 .. size(@var{s})), returns a new seq which contains @code{x} at position
@var{idx}.  If @var{idx} is -1, equivalent to @code{(with-first @var{s} @var{x})}; if @var{idx} is
size(@var{s}), equivalent to @code{(with-last @var{s} @var{x})}.

If @var{idx} < -1 or > size(@var{s}), and @var{s} has a default, inserts as many repetitions of the
default as needed to reach @var{idx}, then inserts @var{x}.  That is, if @var{idx} < -1, inserts
@var{x} followed by (-1 - @var{idx}) repetitions of the default at the beginning; if @var{idx} >
size(@var{s}), inserts (@var{idx} - size(@var{s})) repetitions of the default followed by @var{x} at
the end.  If @var{s} has no default, signals an error of type @code{seq-bounds-error}.

O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less (seq)} @ s idx
If @var{idx} is in [0 .. size(@var{s})), returns a new seq with the element at position @var{idx}
removed.  Otherwise, returns @var{s}.

O(log @i{n})
@end deffn

@deffn Method {inserted (seq)} @ s idx x
@deffnx Method {insert (seq)} @ s idx x
If @var{idx} is in [0 .. size(@var{s})), returns a new seq which contains @code{x} inserted just
before position @code{idx}.  If @var{idx} is 0, equivalent to @code{(with-first @var{s} @var{x})};
if @var{idx} is size(@var{s}), equivalent to @code{(with-last @var{s} @var{x})}.

If @var{idx} < 0 or > size(@var{s}), and @var{s} has a default, inserts as many repetitions of the
default as needed to reach @var{idx}, then inserts @var{x}.  That is, if @var{idx} < 0, inserts
@var{x} followed by (-@var{idx}) repetitions of the default at the beginning; if @var{idx} >
size(@var{s}), inserts (@var{idx} - size(@var{s})) repetitions of the default followed by @var{x} at
the end.  If @var{s} has no default, signals an error of type @code{seq-bounds-error}.

O(log @i{n}).

(For most of FSet's existence, this has been called @code{insert}, but I recently decided that name
is too suggestive of mutation, and have deprecated it in favor of @code{inserted}.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {subseq (seq)} @ s start @r{&optional} end
Returns the subsequence of @var{s} on the interval [@var{start} .. @var{end}).  @var{end} defaults
to size(@var{s}).  Out-of-bounds values for @var{start} and @var{end} are silently adjusted to the
nearest correct bound.

O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {concat (seq)} @ s @r{&rest} seqs
The first argument must be a seq, but the remainder can be any type that can be @href{Generic
Function @code{convert}, converted} to a seq.  Returns the concatenation of the arguments in
the order given.

O(log @i{n}) on two seqs; if conversions are required, they will generally take O(@i{n}) time.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {spliced (seq)} @ s idx subseq
@deffnx Method {splice (seq)} @ s idx subseq
If @var{idx} is in [0 .. size(@var{s})), returns a new seq which contains the elements of
@code{subseq} inserted just before position @code{idx}.  If @var{idx} is 0, equivalent to
@code{(concat @var{subseq} @var{s})}; if @var{idx} is size(@var{s}), equivalent to @code{(concat
@var{s} @var{subseq})}.

If @var{idx} < 0 or > size(@var{s}), and @var{s} has a default, inserts as many repetitions of the
default as needed to reach @var{idx}, then splices in @var{subseq}.  That is, if @var{idx} < 0,
inserts the elements of @var{subseq} followed by (-@var{idx}) repetitions of the default at the
beginning; if @var{idx} > size(@var{s}), inserts (@var{idx} - size(@var{s})) repetitions of the
default followed by the elements of @var{subseq} at the end.  If @var{s} has no default, signals an
error of type @code{seq-bounds-error}.

O(log @i{n}).

(For most of FSet's existence, this has been called @code{splice}, but I recently decided that name
is too suggestive of mutation, and have deprecated it in favor of @code{spliced}.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {reverse (seq)} @ s
Returns the reversal of the seq.  O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {sort (seq)} @ s pred @r{&key} key
@deffnx Method {stable-sort (seq)} @ s pred @r{&key} key
Returns a seq of the same size as @var{s}, with the elements sorted by @var{pred}, which must be a
function of two arguments that implements a
@uref{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_ordering#Strict_weak_orderings, strict weak ordering} (of
which a total ordering is a special case).  If @var{pred}, invoked on A and B, returns true, that
means that A is to appear before B in the result.  There may be pairs A and B such that @var{pred}
returns false on both (A, B) and (B, A) (this is the meaning of ``weak ordering''); such pairs are
called ``incomparable''.  @code{sort} does not guarantee to maintain the ordering of incomparable
elements; @code{stable-sort} keeps them in the same order, relative to one another that they were
in in @var{s}.

If @var{key} is supplied, it is invoked on each element and the resulting value passed to @var{pred}
in its place.

These functions have the same interface as @code{cl:sort} and @code{cl:stable-sort}, so that you can
shadow those names with them (@pxref{Operations on CL Types}).  Therefore @var{pred} can't be a
function like @code{compare} that uses the FSet comparison function protocol, returning one of
@code{:less}, @code{:equal}, @code{:greater}, or @code{:unequal}; you'll need to wrap such a
function to use it, e.g.:

@example
(sort s (lambda (x y) (eq (compare x y) ':less)))
@end example

O(@i{n} log @i{n}), assuming @var{pred} and @var{key} are O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain (seq)} @ s
Returns a set of the valid indices of @var{s}, that is, the integers in [0 .. size(@var{s})).
O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain-contains? (seq)} @ s idx
Returns true iff @var{idx} is an integer in [0 .. size(@var{s})].
@end deffn

@deffn Method {range-contains? (seq)} @ s x
@deffnx Method {contains? (seq)} @ s x
Returns true iff @var{s} contains @var{x} at any index.  The comparison is done with @code{equal?}.
O(@i{n}) (requires a linear search).  (Use whichever name you prefer.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {range (seq)} @ s
Returns the elements of @var{s}, as a set.  O(n log @i{n}).

(Deprecated.  I recommend using a @href{Generic Function @code{convert}, conversion} instead,
e.g. @code{(convert 'set s)}, as this gives you a way to specify the type and organization of the
set if you wish to.)
@end deffn

@anchor{Macro do-seq}
@defmac do-seq @r{(@var{var} @var{seq} &key @var{start end from-end? index value}) &body} body
For each element of @var{seq}, possibly restricted by @var{start} and @var{end}, and in reverse
order if @var{from-end?} is true, binds @var{var} to it and executes @var{body}.  If @var{index} is
supplied, it names a variable that will be bound at each iteration to the index of the current
element of @var{seq}.  When done, returns @var{value} if supplied, else @code{nil}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Method iterator (seq)}
@deffn Method {iterator (seq)} @ s @r{&key} start end from-end?
Returns a @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator} over the seq @var{s}, possibly restricted by
@var{start} and @var{end}, and in reverse order if @var{from-end?} is true.  The @code{:get}
operation returns two values: if there is another element remaining, returns it and a true second
value, else @code{nil} and false.  Creating an iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:get}
operation is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method fun-iterator (seq)}
@deffn Method {fun-iterator (seq)} @ s
Returns a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator} over the seq, possibly restricted by
@var{start} and @var{end}, and in reverse order if @var{from-end?} is true.  The @code{:first}
operation returns two values: if the iterator is not empty, returns the first element and a true
second value, else @code{nil} and false.  Creating an iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the
@code{:first} operation is O(1), and @code{:rest} is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {filter (function seq)} @ pred s
@deffnx Method {filter (symbol seq)} @ pred s
@deffnx Method {filter (map seq)} @ pred s
@c Document (set seq) and (bag seq) too?
Returns a new seq containing only those elements of @var{s} that satisfy @var{pred}, in the same
order in which they appear in @var{s}.  @var{pred} must be a function, an fbound symbol, or a
boolean-valued map.  O(@i{n} ⋅ tc(@var{pred})) + O(@i{r} log @i{r}), where tc(@var{pred}) is the
time complexity of @var{pred} and @i{r} is the size of the result.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {partition (function seq)} @ pred s
@deffnx Method {partition (symbol seq)} @ pred s
@deffnx Method {partition (map seq)} @ pred s
Equivalent to @code{(values (filter pred s) (filter (complement pred) s))} when @var{pred} is a
function.  Returns two values: first, a new seq containing only those elements of @var{s} that
satisfy @var{pred}; second, a seq containing only those elements that do @emph{not} satisfy
@var{pred}.  In both results, the relative order is the same as in @var{s}.  @var{pred} must be a
function, an fbound symbol, or a boolean-valued map.  O(@i{n} ⋅ tc(@var{pred})) + O(@i{r} log
@i{r}), where tc(@var{pred}) is the time complexity of @var{pred} and @i{r} is the size of the
result.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {image (function seq)} @ fn s @r{&key} compare-fn-name
@deffnx Method {image (symbol seq)} @ fn s @r{&key} compare-fn-name
@deffnx Method {image (map seq)} @ fn s @r{&key} compare-fn-name
Returns a seq containing the values of @var{fn} applied to each element of @var{s}, in order.
@var{fn} must be a function, an fbound symbol, or a map.  O(@i{n} ⋅ tc(@var{fn})) + O(@i{r} log
@i{r}), where tc(@var{fn}) is the time complexity of @var{fn} and @i{r} is the size of the result.

@defmac s place fn
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{image}.  If place @var{s}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a seq, updates it so the place now contains the image of the
seq under @var{fn}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {reduce (function seq)} @ fn s @r{&key} key @r{(@var{initial-value} nil)} start end from-end
@deffnx Method {reduce (symbol seq)} @ fn s @r{&key} key @r{(@var{initial-value} nil)} start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Calls @var{fn}
repeatedly with two arguments, a state variable and the element of @var{s} at the next index,
storing the result of each call back into the state variable, and finally returning that result.  If
@var{initial-value} is supplied, it is used as the initial value of the state variable.  Otherwise:
if @var{s} is nonempty, the initial value is the first element; if @var{s} is empty, the result of
@code{reduce} is obtained by calling @var{fn} with no arguments.  In all cases, if @var{key} is
provided, it is called on each element and the result used in place of the element.  (Time
complexity depends on the behavior of @var{fn}.)
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find (t seq)} @ item s @r{&key} key test start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
elements of @var{s} at those indices to find one that matches @var{item} according to @var{key} and
@var{test}.  For each element of @var{s}, @var{key}, a function that defaults to the identity
function, is called on it, and then @var{test} is called on @var{item} and the result; if it returns
true, @code{find} returns the element.  If no match is found, @code{find} returns @code{nil}.
@var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find-if (t seq)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
elements of @var{s} at those indices to find one for which the result of calling @var{key} on it
satisfies @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key}
defaults to the identity function.  Returns the element found, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {find-if-not (t seq)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
elements of @var{s} at those indices to find one for which the result of calling @var{key} on it
does @emph{not} satisfy @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.
@var{key} defaults to the identity function.  Returns the element found, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count (t seq)} @ item s @r{&key} key test start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
elements of @var{s} at those indices, counting the number that match @var{item} according to
@var{key} and @var{test}.  For each such element, @var{key} is called on it, and then @var{test} is
called on @var{item} and the result; if it returns true, the element is counted.  Returns the count.
@var{key} and @var{test} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity
function; @var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count-if (t seq)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} at those indices to count the number for which the result of calling
@var{key} on them satisfies @var{pred}.  Returns the count.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be
functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {count-if-not (t seq)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} at those indices to count the number for which the result of calling
@var{key} on them does not satisfy @var{pred}.  Returns the count.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be
functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {position (t seq)} @ item s @r{&key} key test start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} at those indices to find one that matches @var{item} according to @var{key}
and @var{test}.  For each element of @var{s}, @var{key}, a function that defaults to the identity
function, is called on it, and then @var{test} is called on @var{item} and the result; if it returns
true, @code{position} returns the index of the element.  If no match is found, @code{position}
returns @code{nil}.  @var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {position-if (t seq)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} at those indices to find one for which the result of calling @var{key} on it
satisfies @var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key}
defaults to the identity function.  Returns the index of the element found, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {position-if-not (t seq)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} to find one for which the result of calling @var{key} on it does not satisfy
@var{pred}.  @var{key} and @var{pred} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to
the identity function.  Returns the index of the element found, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {remove (t seq)} @ item s @r{&key} key test start end from-end count
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
elements of @var{s} at those indices, removing any that match @var{item} according to @var{key} and
@var{test}; if @var{count} is provided, stops after removing that many elements.  For each such
element, @var{key} is called on it, and then @var{test} is called on @var{item} and the result; if
it returns true, the element is removed.  Returns the updated seq.  @var{key} and @var{test} must be
functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function; @var{test} defaults to
@code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {remove-if (t seq)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end count
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} at those indices, removing any for which the result of calling @var{key} on
them satisfies @var{pred}; if @var{count} is provided, stops after removing that many elements.
Returns the updated seq.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key}
defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {remove-if-not (t seq)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end count
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} at those indices, removing any for which the result of calling @var{key} on
them does not satisfy @var{pred}; if @var{count} is provided, stops after removing that many
elements.  Returns the updated seq.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be functions or fbound symbols.
@var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {substitute (t t seq)} @ newitem olditem s @r{&key} key test start end from-end count
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
elements of @var{s} at those indices, substituting with @var{newitem} any that match @var{olditem}
according to @var{key} and @var{test}; if @var{count} is provided, stops after substituting that
many elements.  For each such element, @var{key} is called on it, and then @var{test} is called on
@var{olditem} and the result; if it returns true, the element is substituted.  Returns the updated
seq.  @var{key} and @var{test} must be functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the
identity function; @var{test} defaults to @code{equal?}, not @code{eql}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {substitute-if (t t seq)} @ newitem pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end count
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} at those indices, substituting with @var{newitem} any for which the result
of calling @var{key} on them satisfies @var{pred}; if @var{count} is provided, stops after
substituting that many elements.  Returns the updated seq.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be
functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {substitute-if-not (t t seq)} @ newitem pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end count
Iterates over [@var{start} .. @var{end}), where @var{start} defaults to 0 and @var{end} defaults to
size(@var{s}); if @var{from-end} is true, the iteration is in reverse order.  Scans linearly through
the elements of @var{s} at those indices, substituting with @var{newitem} any for which the result
of calling @var{key} on them does not satisfy @var{pred}; if @var{count} is provided, stops after
substituting that many elements.  Returns the updated seq.  @var{pred} and @var{key} must be
functions or fbound symbols.  @var{key} defaults to the identity function.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {search (seq t)} @ seq1 seq2 @r{&key} from-end test key start1 start2 end1 end2
@deffnx Method {search (t seq)} @ seq1 seq2 @r{&key} from-end test key start1 start2 end1 end2
Searches the interval of @var{seq2} bounded by @var{start2} and @var{end2} for a subsequence
matching the interval of @var{seq1} between @var{start1} and @var{end1}.  One of @var{seq1} and
@var{seq2} must be a seq for this method to be callled (otherwise, the @href{find etc. compatibility
methods, compatibility method} will be called), but the other can be anything that can be
@href{Generic Function @code{convert}, converted} to a seq.  Elements are compared using @var{test},
which defaults to @code{equal?}.  Returns the index of the leftmost occurrence, unless
@var{from-end} is true, in which case it returns the index of the leftmost element of the rightmost
occurrence.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {mismatch (seq t)} @ seq1 seq2 @r{&key} from-end test key start1 start2 end1 end2
@deffnx Method {mismatch (t seq)} @ seq1 seq2 @r{&key} from-end test key start1 start2 end1 end2
Scans in parallel the interval of @var{seq1} between @var{start1} and @var{end1} and the interval of
@var{seq2} between @var{start2} and @var{end2}, comparing corresponding elements, and returning the
absolute index within @var{seq1} of the first mismatch (unequal pair).  One of @var{seq1} and
@var{seq2} must be a seq for this method to be callled (otherwise, the @href{find etc. compatibility
methods, compatibility method} will be called), but the other can be anything that can be
@href{Generic Function @code{convert}, converted} to a seq.  If @var{from-end} is true, the
comparison starts at the right ends of the intervals rather than the left ends.
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Replay Sets and Maps
@section Replay Sets and Maps

@dfn{Replay set} is my term for a set whose iteration order is the order in which the elements were
first added to it.  It's the same concept as Java's @code{LinkedHashSet}, but I don't like the term
``linked'' here, because it's a fact about the implementation, not the semantics.  Anyway, FSet's
replay sets don't use a linked list, but keep the ordering in a seq alongside the set.

Alternatively, you can look at a replay set as a sequence that enforces uniqueness: an element can
be added only once.

@dfn{Replay maps} are very similar; like @code{LinkedHashMap}, they remember the order in which keys
were first added.  They also use a seq for this purpose.

Of course, FSet's implementation is functional and persistent.  There is one significant downside to
it, though: the @code{less} and @code{index} operations take O(@i{n}) time, as they have to scan
through the seq to find the element or key.

The original implementations of replay sets and maps used WB-trees.  By default, the newer and
faster CHAMP sets and maps are now used instead.  I have not removed the older classes
@code{wb-replay-set} and @code{wb-replay-map}, so as not to break existing code, but I'm not
documenting them because I don't know why you would want to use them; iteration order is not a
concern here, since it's imposed by the client anyway.

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Replay Sets
@subsection Replay Sets

@deftp {Data type} replay-set
The abstract class for FSet functional replay sets.  Subclass of @code{set}.
@end deftp

@defun replay-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional replay set.
@end defun

@anchor{Type ch-replay-set}
@deftp {Data type} ch-replay-set
Functional replay sets implemented as pairs of a CHAMP set and a seq.  Subclass of
@code{replay-set}.  These print as:

@example
##@{= @i{e0} @i{e1} ... @}[@i{compare-fn}]
@end example

That is, there's an @code{=} just inside the opening brace; otherwise they look like ch-sets.  As
always, the comparison function is printed only if it is not @code{compare}.
@end deftp

@defun ch-replay-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional CHAMP replay set.
@end defun

@deftp {Data type} transient-replay-set
The abstract class for FSet transient replay sets.  Subclass of @code{transient-set}.
@end deftp

@defun transient-replay-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient replay set.
@end defun

@defun empty-replay-set
@defunx empty-ch-replay-set @r{&key} compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty @code{ch-replay-set}.  By default, its internal set will be
organized by @code{compare}.  To use a custom organization, supply the comparison function name (a
symbol) as @code{compare-fn-name}; a hash function must have been defined for it using
@href{Macro define-hash-function, @code{define-hash-function}}.  (A custom organization will not affect
the set's ordering for iteration or printing; the only reason you would need one is if you had a
user-defined data type for which you had not defined methods on @code{compare} and
@code{hash-value}.)
@end defun

@anchor{Macro replay-set}
@defmac replay-set @r{&rest} subforms
@defmacx ch-replay-set @r{&rest} subforms
@defmacx ch-custom-replay-set compare-fn-name @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{ch-replay-set} according to the supplied argument subforms.
Each argument subform can be an expression, whose value will be an element of the result set; or a
list of the form @code{($ @var{expression})}, in which case the expression must evaluate to a set
(possibly a replay set), all of whose elements become elements of the result set.  Elements are
added in left-to-right order.

To use a custom organization, use @code{ch-custom-replay-set}.  @code{compare-fn-name} must be a
symbol naming the desired comparison function; a hash function must have been defined for it using
@href{Macro define-hash-function, @code{define-hash-function}}.
@end defmac

@hrule{}

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Replay-Set Operations
@subsubsection Replay-Set Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (replay-set)} @ rs
Returns true iff @var{rs} is empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (replay-set)} @ rs
Returns the number of elements in @var{rs}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (replay-set)} @ rs
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} element of @var{rs}.  Specifically, on a nonempty replay set,
returns two values: an arbitrary element and true; on an empty one, returns two false values.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {first (replay-set)} @ rs
If @var{rs} is nonempty, returns its first element (the first one added to it) and a true second
value; otherwise, @code{nil} and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {last (replay-set)} @ rs
If @var{trs} is nonempty, returns its last element (the one most recently added to it) and a true
second value; otherwise, @code{nil} and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {index (replay-set)} @ rs x
Returns the index of @var{x} within the ordering of @var{rs}, or @code{nil} if it is not found.
NOTE: O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-index (replay-set)} @ rs idx
Returns the element at index @var{idx} within the ordering of @var{rs}.  Signals an error if
@var{idx} is out of bounds.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (replay-set)} @ rs x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an element of @var{rs}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (replay-set)} @ rs x
If @var{rs} contains @var{x}, returns two values, true and the element found; else false and
@code{nil}.  (This is useful for canonicalizing instances; the element found may be a different
instance from @var{x}.)  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with (replay-set)} @ rs x
Returns a replay set, of the same class and organization as @var{s}, that contains all elements of
@var{s} and also @var{x}.  If @var{s} did not already contain @var{x}, @var{x} is appended to the
set's ordering.  O(log @i{n}).

@defmac includef rs x
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{with}.  If place @var{rs}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a replay set, updates it to contain @var{x}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less (replay-set)} @ rs x
Returns a set, of the same class and organization as @var{rs}, that contains all elements of
@var{rs} except @var{x}.  NOTE: O(@i{n}).

@defmac excludef rs x
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{less}.  If place @var{rs}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a replay set, updates it not to contain @var{x}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {union (replay-set set)} @ rs s
Iterates over @var{s}, adding each of its elements to @var{rs}, and returning the final value of
@var{rs}.  That is, if @var{s} is itself a replay set, its elements that are not already in
@var{rs} will be added in order to the end of @var{rs}.  O(size(@var{s}) log size(@var{rs})).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {intersection (replay-set set)} @ rs s
Iterates over @var{rs}, retaining each of its elements that is also in @var{s}.  That is, the result
contains the elements that are in both sets, in the order in which they appear in @var{rs}.
O(size(@var{rs}) log size(@var{s})).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method iterator (replay-set)}
@deffn Method {iterator (replay-set)} @ s
Returns a @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator} over the set, in replay order (the order in
which elements were first added).  The @code{:get} operation returns two values: if there is another
element remaining, returns it and a true second value, else @code{nil} and false.  Creating an
iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:get} operation is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method fun-iterator (replay-set)}
@deffn Method {fun-iterator (replay-set)} @ s
Returns a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator} over the set, in replay order (the order
in which elements were first added).  The @code{:first} operation returns two values: if the
iterator is not empty, returns the first element and a true second value, else @code{nil} and false.
Creating an iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:first} operation is O(1), and @code{:rest}
is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node CH-Replay-Set Operations
@subsubsection CH-Replay-Set Operations

CHAMP replay sets support @href{Transients, transients}.

@deffn Method {make-transient (ch-replay-set)} @ rs @r{&key} synchronized?
Makes a @code{transient-ch-replay-set} whose initial contents are those of @var{rs}.  If
@code{synchronized?} is true, all operations on the transient will be serialized via locking;
otherwise, the transient is not thread-safe.
@end deffn

@anchor{Type transient-ch-replay-set}
@deftp {Data type} transient-ch-replay-set
A transient CHAMP replay set.  Subclass of @code{transient-replay-set}.  These print simply as:

@example
#<TRANSIENT-CH-REPLAY-SET @i{id}>
@end example

where @i{id} is a serial number to identify the instance.
@end deftp

@defun transient-ch-replay-set? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient CHAMP replay set.
@end defun

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Transient-CH-Replay-Set Operations
@subsubsection Transient-CH-Replay-Set Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs
Returns true iff @var{trs} is currently empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs
Returns the current number of elements in @var{trs}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} element of the current contents of @var{trs}.  Specifically,
on a nonempty set, returns two values: an arbitrary element and true; on an empty set, returns two
false values.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {first (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs
If @var{trs} is nonempty, returns its first element (the first one added to it) and a true second
value; otherwise, @code{nil} and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {last (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs
If @var{trs} is nonempty, returns its last element (the one most recently added to it) and a true
second value; otherwise, @code{nil} and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {index (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ rs x
Returns the index of @var{x} within the ordering of @var{rs}, or @code{nil} if it is not found.
NOTE: O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-index (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ rs idx
Returns the element at index @var{idx} within the ordering of @var{rs}.  Signals an error if
@var{idx} is out of bounds.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs x
Returns true iff @var{x} is currently an element of @var{trs}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {clear! (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs
Removes all elements from @var{trs}, resetting it to the empty state.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {include! (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs value
Modifies @var{trs} so that it contains @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the case.
Returns @var{trs}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {exclude! (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs value
Modifies @var{trs} so that it does not contain @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the
case.  Returns @var{trs}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {make-persistent (transient-ch-replay-set)} @ trs @r{&key} copy?
Returns a persistent FSet @code{ch-replay-set} (the usual kind, with functional semantics) with the
contents of @var{trs}.  Subsequent modifications to the transient are permitted, and of course will
not affect the persistent one.

This operation has two modes, depending on @var{copy?}.  If @var{copy?} is false (the default), it
takes O(1) time; but subsequent modifications to the transient will behave performance-wise as if a
new transient had been created.  If @var{copy?}  is true, the operation takes O(n) time, but
subsequent modifications to the transient will run at full speed.  Copying the collection also
compacts it, so it uses less heap space.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Replay Maps
@subsection Replay Maps

@deftp {Data type} replay-map
The abstract class for FSet functional replay maps.  Subclass of @code{map}.
@end deftp

@defun replay-map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional replay map.
@end defun

@anchor{Type ch-replay-map}
@deftp {Data type} ch-replay-map
Functional replay maps implemented as pairs of a CHAMP map and a seq.  Subclass of
@code{replay-map}.  These print as:

@example
##@{=| (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1}) ... |@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]/@i{default}
@end example

That is, there's an @code{=} just inside the opening brace; otherwise they look like ch-maps.  As
always, the comparison function is printed only if it is not @code{compare}, and the default is
printed only if it is not @code{nil}.
@end deftp

@defun ch-replay-map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional CHAMP replay map.
@end defun

@deftp {Data type} transient-replay-map
The abstract class for FSet transient replay maps.  Subclass of @code{transient-map}.
@end deftp

@defun transient-replay-map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient replay map.
@end defun

@defun empty-replay-map @r{&key (@var{default} nil)} no-default?
@defunx empty-ch-replay-map @r{&key (@var{default} nil)} no-default? key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty @code{ch-replay-map} with the specified @var{default}, or
with no default if @var{no-default?} is true.  By default, its internal map will be organized by
@code{compare}.  To use a custom organization, @var{key-compare-fn-name} and
@var{val-compare-fn-name} must be symbols naming the comparison functions to be used for keys and
values respectively (these default to @code{compare}).  A hash function must have been defined for
each comparison function using @href{Macro define-hash-function, @code{define-hash-function}}.  (A
custom organization will not affect the map's ordering for iteration or printing; the only reason
you would need one is if you had a user-defined data type for which you had not defined methods on
@code{compare} and @code{hash-value}.)
@end defun

@anchor{Macro replay-map}
@defmac replay-map @r{&rest} subforms
@defmacx ch-replay-map @r{&rest} subforms
@defmacx ch-custom-replay-map key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{ch-replay-map} according to the supplied argument subforms.
Each argument subform can be a list of the form @code{(@var{key-expr} @var{value-expr})}, denoting a
mapping from the value of @var{key-expr} to the value of @var{value-expr}; or a list of the form
@code{($ @var{expression})}, in which case the expression must evaluate to a map, denoting all its
mappings; or the symbol @code{:default}, followed by a form; or the symbol @code{:no-default}.  If
@code{:default} is supplied, the map's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} is the value of the
subsequent form; if @code{:no-default} is supplied, the map has no default; if neither, the map's
default is @code{nil}.

By default, its internal map will be organized by @code{compare}.  To use a custom organization, use
@code{ch-custom-replay-map}; @var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name} must be symbols
naming the comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (these default to
@code{compare}).  A hash function must have been defined for each comparison function using
@href{Macro define-hash-function, @code{define-hash-function}}.  (A custom organization will not
affect the map's ordering for iteration or printing; the only reason you would need one is if you
had a user-defined data type for which you had not defined methods on @code{compare} and
@code{hash-value}.)

The result is constructed from the denoted mappings in left-to-right order; so if a given key is
supplied by more than one argument subform, its associated value will be given by the rightmost such
subform, but its position in the ordering by the leftmost.
@end defmac

@hrule{}

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Replay-Map Operations
@subsubsection Replay-Map Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (replay-map)} @ rm
Returns true iff @var{rm} is empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (replay-map)} @ rm
Returns the number of key-value pairs in @var{rm}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (replay-map)} @ rm
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} pair of @var{rm}.  Specifically, on a nonempty replay map,
returns three values: an arbitrary key, its associated value, and true; on an empty one, returns
@code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {first (replay-map)} @ rm
If @var{rm} is nonempty, returns, as three values, the first key that was added to @var{rm}, its
most recently associated value, and true.  If @var{rm} is empty, returns @code{nil}, @code{nil}, and
false.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {last (replay-map)} @ rm
If @var{rm} is nonempty, returns, as three values, the last (most recent) key that was added to
@var{rm}, its most recently associated value, and true.  If @var{rm} is empty, returns @code{nil},
@code{nil}, and false.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {index (replay-map)} @ rm x
Returns the index of @var{x} within the ordering of the keys of @var{rm}, or @code{nil} if it is not
found.  NOTE: O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-index (replay-map)} @ rm idx
Returns, as two values, the element at index @var{idx} within the ordering of @var{rm} and its
associated value.  Signals an error if @var{idx} is out of bounds.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (replay-map)} @ rm k @r{&optional} v
If @var{v} is not supplied, returns true iff the domain of @var{rm} contains @var{k}.  If @var{v} is
supplied, returns true iff @var{rm} maps @var{k} to @var{v}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain-contains? (replay-map)} @ rm k
Returns true iff the domain of @var{rm} contains @var{k}.  (This is now redundant with two-argument
@code{contains?}, and is mildly deprecated.  For most of FSet's history, @code{contains?} on a map
required three arguments; so it was all but useless, and you had to use @code{domain-contains?}
instead.  Fortunately, I finally came to my senses and fixed @code{contains?} to accept two
arguments.)  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (replay-map)} @ rm k
If @var{rm} contains a key equal to @var{k}, according to its key comparison function, returns three
values: the corresponding value, true, and the key found; otherwise, the map's @href{Map and Seq
Defaults, default}, false, and @code{nil}.  If the key is not found and the map has no default,
signals an error of type @code{map-domain-error}.  O(log @i{n}).

@deffn {@code{setf} Expander} {setf lookup (replay-map)} @ rm k v
Invoked as @code{(setf (lookup @var{rm} @var{k}) @var{v})}.  If the place @var{rm} (which must be
@code{setf}-able) holds a replay map, updates it to have a new mapping from @var{k} to @var{v}.
Equivalent to @code{(setf @var{rm} (with @var{rm} @var{k} @var{v}))}, except that subexpressions
within @var{rm} are evaluated only once.

You can also write @code{(setf (@@ @var{rm} @var{k}) @var{v})}.  @xref{The @code{@@} Macro}.
@end deffn
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with (replay-map)} @ rm k v
Returns a replay map, of the same class and organization as @var{rm}, that contains all pairs of
@var{rm} whose key is not equal to @var{k} (according to its key comparison function), and also maps
@var{k} to @var{v}.  If @var{rm} did not already contain key @var{k}, @var{k} is appended to the
map's ordering.  O(log @i{n}).

@defmac includef rm k v
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{with}.  If place @var{rm}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a replay map, updates it so the map now maps @var{k} to
@var{v}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less (replay-map)} @ rm k
Returns a map, of the same class and organization as @var{rm}, that contains all pairs of @var{rm}
whose key is not equal to @var{k}.  NOTE: O(@i{n}).

@defmac excludef rm k
A @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, modify macro} that expands to @code{less}.  If place @var{rm}
(which must be @code{setf}-able) holds a replay map, updates it so the map does not contain a key
@var{k}.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with-default (replay-map)} @ rm new-default
Returns a new map that has all the pairs of @var{rm} in the same order, but whose default is
@var{new-default}.  O(1).

@deffn {@code{setf} Expander} default @ rm new-default
@code{(setf (default @var{rm}) @var{new-default})} is equivalent to @code{(setf @var{rm}
(with-default @var{rm} @var{new-default}))}, except that subexpressions within @var{rm} are
evaluated only once.
@end deffn
@end deffn

@deffn Method {without-default (replay-map)} @ rm
Returns a new map that has all the pairs of @var{rm} in the same order, but has no default.  O(1).

@defmac clear-default rm
@code{(clear-default @var{rm})} is equivalent to @code{(setf @var{rm} (without-default @var{rm}))},
except that subexpressions within @var{rm} are evaluated only once.
@end defmac
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain (replay-map)} @ rm
Returns the domain (set of keys) of @var{rm} as a replay set of the same implementation, and using
@var{rm}'s key ordering as its ordering.  O(@i{n}), but with a relatively small constant factor.
@end deffn

@anchor{Method iterator (replay-map)}
@deffn Method {iterator (replay-map)} @ m
Returns a @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator} over the map @var{m}, in replay order (the
order in which keys were first added).  The @code{:get} operation returns three values: if there is
another key/value pair remaining, returns it as two values and a true third value, else two
@code{nil} values and false.  Creating an iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:get}
operation is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method fun-iterator (replay-map)}
@deffn Method {fun-iterator (replay-map)} @ m
Returns a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator} over the map @var{m}, in replay order
(the order in which keys were first added).  The @code{:first} operation returns three values: if
the iterator is not empty, returns the first key/value pair as two values and a true third value,
else two @code{nil} values and false.  Creating an iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the
@code{:first} operation is O(1), and @code{:rest} is amortized O(1).
@end deffn


@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node CH-Replay-Map Operations
@subsubsection CH-Replay-Map Operations

CHAMP replay maps support @href{Transients, transients}.

@deffn Method {make-transient (ch-replay-map)} @ rm @r{&key} synchronized?
Makes a @code{transient-ch-replay-set} whose initial contents are those of @var{rm}.  If
@code{synchronized?} is true, all operations on the transient will be serialized via locking;
otherwise, the transient is not thread-safe.
@end deffn

@anchor{Type transient-ch-replay-map}
@deftp {Data type} transient-ch-replay-map
A transient CHAMP replay map.  Subclass of @code{transient-replay-map}.  These print simply as:

@example
#<TRANSIENT-CH-REPLAY-MAP @i{id}>
@end example

where @i{id} is a serial number to identify the instance.
@end deftp

@defun transient-ch-replay-map? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient CHAMP replay map.
@end defun

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Transient-CH-Replay-Map Operations
@subsubsection Transient-CH-Replay-Map Operations

Note that although you can use either @code{lookup} or @code{lookup!} to retrieve a value from a
transient map, and either @code{default} or @code{default!} to read its default, only the forms
ending in @code{!} can be used as a @code{setf} place.

@deffn Method  {empty? (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
Returns true iff @var{trm} is currently empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
Returns the current number of elements in @var{trm}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} element of the current contents of @var{trm}.  Specifically,
on a nonempty map, returns three values: an arbitrary key, its value, and true; on an empty map,
returns @code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {first (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
If @var{trm} is nonempty, returns, as three values, the first key that was added to @var{trm}, its
most recently associated value, and true.  If @var{trm} is empty, returns @code{nil}, @code{nil},
and false.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {last (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
If @var{trm} is nonempty, returns, as three values, the last (most recent) key that was added to
@var{trm}, its most recently associated value, and true.  If @var{trm} is empty, returns @code{nil},
@code{nil}, and false.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {index (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm x
Returns the index of @var{x} within the ordering of the keys of @var{trm}, or @code{nil} if it is
not found.  NOTE: O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {at-index (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm idx
Returns, as two values, the key at index @var{idx} within the ordering of @var{trm} and its
associated value.  Signals an error if @var{idx} is out of bounds.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm key @r{&optional} value
Returns true iff @var{key} is currently a key of @var{trm}, and if @var{value} is supplied, it is
the corresponding value.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {clear! (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
Removes all key/value pairs from @var{trm}, resetting it to the empty state.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {include! (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm key value
Modifies @var{trm} so that it maps @var{key} to @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the
case.  Returns @var{trm}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {exclude! (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm key
Modifies @var{trm} so that it does not contain a mapping for @var{key}.  Has no effect if this was
already the case.  Returns @var{trm}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm key
@deffnx Method {lookup! (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm key
If @var{trm} currently contains a key equal to @var{k}, according to its key comparison function, returns three
values: the corresponding value, true, and the key found; otherwise, the map's @href{Map and Seq
Defaults, default}, false, and @code{nil}.  If the key is not found and the map has no default,
signals an error of type @code{map-domain-error}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {setf lookup! (t transient-ch-replay-map)} @ value trm key
Invoked as @code{(setf (lookup! @var{trm} @var{key}) @var{value})}.  Modifies @var{trm} so that it
maps @var{key} to @var{value}.  Has no effect if this was already the case.  Returns @var{value}
(the CL spec for @code{setf} requires this).  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {default (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
@deffnx Method {default! (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
Returns the @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default} associated with @var{trm}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {setf default! (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm new-default
Invoked as @code{(setf (default! @var{trm}) @var{new-default})}.  Changes the default associated
with @var{trm} to @var{new-default}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {clear-default! (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm
Removes the default from @var{trm}.  Subsequent lookups using keys not in the domain of @var{trm}
will cause an error to be signalled.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {make-persistent (transient-ch-replay-map)} @ trm @r{&key} copy?
Returns a persistent FSet @code{ch-replay-map} (the usual kind, with functional semantics) with the
contents of @var{trm}.  Subsequent modifications to the transient are permitted, and of course will
not affect the persistent one.

This operation has two modes, depending on @var{copy?}.  If @var{copy?} is false (the default), it
takes O(1) time; but subsequent modifications to the transient will behave performance-wise as if a
new transient had been created.  If @var{copy?}  is true, the operation takes O(n) time, but
subsequent modifications to the transient will run at full speed.  Copying the collection also
compacts it, so it uses less heap space.
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Binary Relations
@section Binary Relations

Where a map is a set of key/value pairs where the keys are unique, a binary relation is any set of
such pairs, possibly with dupicate keys.  For a simple example, imagine you have a number of
products, each of which comes in one or more colors.  There are, in general, multiple colors per
product, but also different products that come in the same color; so you couldn't represent this as
a map from product to color, or one from color to product.  What you have is a binary relation.  You
could draw it as a boolean-valued matrix where the rows are products and the columns are colors.

You @emph{could} represent your matrix as a map from each product to a @emph{set} of colors; and
that's how FSet treats binary relations internally.  The inverse mapping, from color to set of
products, may also be of interest; FSet will build that for you on demand and cache it, updating it
incrementally as you update the relation.  The operations listed below that cause the inverse
mapping to be built are marked as ``constructs inverse''; the time complexities for these operations
are given as amortized, under the assumption that the inverse mapping has usually already been
built.

I used the name @code{2-relation} for these, partly because it's shorter than
@code{binary-relation}, and partly to show off Lisp's unconventional lexical rules --- most
languages wouldn't let us start an identifier with a digit!

There are both CHAMP and WB implementations; the default is CHAMP.

@c &&& Relations: I have a class `relation' in between `collection' and `2-relation', but its only methods are
@c `arity' and `join'.  Someday, I'll add tuple relations, at which time I'll rework this. 

@deftp {Data type} 2-relation
The abstract class of FSet functional binary relations.  Subclass of @code{collection}.
@end deftp

@defun 2-relation? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional binary relation.
@end defun

@deftp {Data type} transient-2-relation
The abstract class of FSet functional binary relations.  Subclass of @code{transient-collection}.
@end deftp

@defun 2-relation? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional binary relation.
@end defun

@defun empty-2-relation
Constructor function.  Returns an empty binary relation of the default implementation, currently
@code{ch-2-relation}, and the default organization.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro 2-relation}
@defmac 2-relation @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a 2-relation of the default implementation, currently
@code{ch-2-relation}, and the default organization according to the supplied argument subforms.
Each argument subform can be a list of the form (@var{key-expr} @var{value-expr}), denoting a
mapping from the value of @var{key-expr} to the value of @var{value-expr}; or a list of the form ($
@var{expression}), in which case the expression must evaluate to a 2-relation, all of whose mappings
will be included in the result.  Also, each of @var{key-expr} and @var{value-expr} can be of the
form ($ @var{expression}), in which case the expression must evaluate to a set, and the elements of
the set are used individually to form pairs; for example:

@example
> (2-relation (($ (set 1 2)) ($ (set 'a 'b))))
##@{+ (1 B) (1 A) (2 B) (2 A) +@}
@end example
@end defmac

@anchor{Type ch-2-relation}
@deftp {Data type} ch-2-relation
Functional binary relations implemented using CHAMP trees.  Subclass of @code{2-relation}.  These
print as:

@example
##@{+ (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1}) ... +@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]
@end example

Note the double @code{#}, which indicates CHAMP, and the plus signs just inside the braces.  The
comparison functions are printed only if they are not @code{compare}.
@end deftp

@defun ch-2-relation? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional CHAMP binary relation.
@end defun

@defun empty-ch-2-relation @r{&key} key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Constructor function.  Returns an empty @code{ch-2-relation}.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and
@var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols naming the comparison functions to be used
for keys and values respectively (these default to @code{compare}).  A hash function must have been
defined for each comparison function using @href{Macro define-hash-function, @code{define-hash-function}}.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro ch-2-relation}
@defmac ch-2-relation @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a ch-2-relation according to the supplied argument subforms.  See
@href{Macro 2-relation, @code{2-relation}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@defmac ch-custom-2-relation @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a ch-2-relation with a custom organization, according to the supplied
argument subforms.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name} must be symbols naming
the comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (you can use @code{nil} as a
synonym of @code{compare}).  See @href{Macro 2-relation, @code{2-relation}@comma{} above} for the
interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Type wb-2-relation}
@deftp {Data type} wb-2-relation
Functional binary relations implemented using WB-trees.  Subclass of @code{2-relation}.  These print
as:

@example
#@{+ (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1}) ... +@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]
@end example

Note the single @code{#}, which indicates WB, and the plus signs just inside the braces.  The
comparison functions are printed only if they are not @code{compare}.
@end deftp

@defun wb-2-relation? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional WB-tree binary relation.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro wb-2-relation}
@defmac wb-2-relation @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a wb-2-relation according to the supplied argument subforms.  See
@href{Macro 2-relation, @code{2-relation}@comma{} above} for the interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@defmac wb-custom-2-relation @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a wb-2-relation with a custom organization, according to the supplied
argument subforms.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name} must be symbols naming
the comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (you can use @code{nil} as a
synonym of @code{compare}).  See @href{Macro 2-relation, @code{2-relation}@comma{} above} for the
interpretation of @var{subforms}.
@end defmac

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node 2-Relation Operations
@subsection 2-Relation Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (2-relation)} @ r
Returns true iff @var{r} is empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (2-relation)} @ r
Returns the number of key/value pairs in @var{r}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (2-relation)} @ r
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} key/value pair of @var{r}.  Specifically, on a nonempty
relation, returns three values: an arbitrary key, an arbitrary value associated with that key, and
true; on an empty relation, returns @code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {inverse (2-relation)} @ r
Constructs inverse.  Returns the inverse of @var{r}, that is, a relation with the same pairs as
@var{r} except that keys and values are swapped.  The returned relation is of the same
implementation as @var{r}, and its key and value comparison functions are swapped.  Amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (2-relation)} @ r x y
Returns true iff @var{r} contains a pair whose key is @var{x} and whose value is @var{y}.  O(log
@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain-contains? (2-relation)} @ r x
Returns true iff @var{r} has any pair whose key is @var{x}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {range-contains? (2-relation)} @ r y
Constructs inverse.  Returns true iff @var{r} has any pair whose value is @var{y}.  Amortized O(log
@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (2-relation)} @ r x
Returns the set of values to which @var{r} maps key @var{x}.  If @var{r} has no pairs with
key @var{x}, simply returns an empty set.  The returned set is of the same implementation (WB or
CHAMP) as @var{r}, and its comparison function is the value comparison function of @var{r}.  O(log
@i{n}).

The use of @code{setf} with @code{lookup} on a binary relation is not recommended, as the semantics
don't make sense; @code{(setf (lookup @var{r} @var{x}) @var{y})} simply adds the pair <@var{x},
@var{y}> to @var{r}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup-inv (2-relation)} @ r y
Constructs inverse.  Returns the set of keys that @var{r} maps to value @var{y}.  If @var{r} has no
pairs with value @var{y}, simply returns an empty set.  The returned set is of the same
implementation (WB or CHAMP) as @var{r}, and its comparison function is the key comparison function
of @var{r}.  Amortized O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain (2-relation)} @ r
Returns the domain of @var{r}, that is, the set of keys it maps to at least one value.  O(n).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {range (2-relation)} @ r
Constructs inverse.  Returns the range of @var{r}, that is, the set of values to which at least one
key is mapped.  Amortized O(n).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with (2-relation)} @ r x y
Returns a relation, of the same type and organization as @var{r}, that contains all pairs of @var{r}
and also maps key @var{x} to value @var{y}.  If @var{r} already contained that mapping, returns
@var{r} itself.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less (2-relation)} @ r x y
Returns a relation, of the same type and organization as @var{r}, that contains all pairs of @var{r}
except the one mapping key @var{x} to value @var{y}.  If @var{r} already did not contain that
mapping, returns @var{r} itself.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {union (2-relation 2-relation)} @ r1 r2
Returns a relation, of the same type and organization is @var{r1}, that contains all pairs that are
in either @var{r1} or @var{r2}.  Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of
equal objects in the two relations, the result contains the instance that was in @var{s1}.  If either
@var{r1} or @var{r2} has had its inverse constructed, the result does also.  O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {intersection (2-relation 2-relation)} @ r1 r2
Returns a relation, of the same type and organization is @var{r1}, that contains all pairs that are
in both @var{r1} and @var{r2}.  Implements @href{Left Preference, left preference}: for any pair of
equal objects in the two relations, the result contains the instance that was in @var{r1}.  If
either @var{r1} or @var{r2} has had its inverse constructed, the result does also.  O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {join (2-relation t 2-relation t)} @ r1 c1 r2 c2
Here @var{c1} and @var{c2} designate columns of @var{r1} and @var{r2} respectively, as 0 for the
domain and 1 for the range.  Computes and returns the equijoin of @var{r1} column @var{c1} with
@var{r2} column @var{c2}.  This is a 2-relation in which each pair of pairs of the two relations
that have equal values in the specified columns become one pair in the result, with the other column
of the @var{r1} pair being its domain value and the other column in the @var{r2} pair its range
value.  O(@i{n}).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method conflicts (2-relation)}
@deffn Method {conflicts (2-relation)} @ r
Returns a 2-relation containing those pairs of @var{r} for which the key is mapped to more than one
value.  O(n).

(The use case for this operation is when you expect the relation to be a function, or nearly so;
perhaps you plan to @href{Generic Function @code{convert}, convert} it to a map.  If @var{r} is a
function already, @code{conflicts} returns an empty relation; otherwise, it tells you which keys map
to non-unique values --- the idea is that these are conflicts that will need to be resolved
somehow.)
@end deffn

@c &&& Relations: test and document `transitive-closure'.

@anchor{Macro do-2-relation}
@defmac do-2-relation  @r{(@var{x} @var{y} @var{rel} &optional @var{value}) &body} body
For each key/value pair of @var{rel}, binds @var{x} to the key and @var{y} to the value and executes
@var{body}.  When done, returns @var{value} if supplied, otherwise @code{nil}.

(If you want to execute the body only once for each @emph{key}, write:
@example
(do-map (x y-set (convert 'map-to-sets @var{rel}))
  ...)
@end example
@var{y-set} will be bound to the set of values for the current key.)
@end defmac

@anchor{Method iterator (2-relation)}
@deffn Method {iterator (2-relation)} @ r
Returns a @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator} over the 2-relation @var{r}.  The @code{:get}
operation returns three values: if there is another key/value pair remaining, returns it as two
values and a true third value, else two @code{nil} values and false.  Creating an iterator takes
O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:get} operation is amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@anchor{Method fun-iterator (2-relation)}
@deffn Method {fun-iterator (2-relation)} @ m
Returns a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator} over the 2-relation @var{r}.  The
@code{:first} operation returns three values: if the iterator is not empty, returns the first
key/value pair as two values and a true third value, else two @code{nil} values and false.  Creating
an iterator takes O(log @i{n}) time; the @code{:first} operation is O(1), and @code{:rest} is
amortized O(1).
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node CH-2-Relation Operations
@subsection CH-2-Relation Operations

CHAMP binary relations support @href{Transients, transients}.

@deffn Method {make-transient (ch-2-relation)} @ s @r{&key} synchronized?
Makes a @code{transient-ch-2-relation} whose initial contents are those of @var{s}.  If
@code{synchronized?} is true, all operations on the transient will be serialized via locking;
otherwise, the transient is not thread-safe.
@end deffn

@anchor{Type transient-ch-2-relation}
@deftp {Data type} transient-ch-2-relation
A transient CHAMP binary relation.  Subclass of @code{transient-2-relation}.  These print simply as:

@example
#<TRANSIENT-CH-2-RELATION @i{id}>
@end example

where @i{id} is a serial number to identify the instance.
@end deftp

@defun transient-ch-2-relation? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet transient CHAMP binary relation.
@end defun

@hrule{}

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Transient-CH-2-Relation Operations
@subsubsection Transient-CH-2-Relation Operations

@deffn Method  {empty? (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr
Returns true iff @var{tr} is currently empty.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {size (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr
Returns the current number of pairs in @var{tr}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {arb (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr
Returns an @href{arbitrary, arbitrary} pair of the current contents of @var{tr}.  Specifically, on a
nonempty relation, returns three values: an arbitrary key, an arbitrary value associated with that
key, and true; on an empty relation, returns @code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr x y
Returns true iff @var{tr} currently contains a pair whose key is @var{x} and whose value is @var{y}.
O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr x
Returns the set of values to which @var{tr} currently maps key @var{x}.  If @var{tr} has no pairs
with key @var{x}, simply returns an empty set.  The returned set is of the same implementation (WB
or CHAMP) as @var{tr}, and its comparison function is the value comparison function of @var{r}.
This operation copies the set being returned.  O(@i{m} + log @i{n}), where @i{m} is the size of the
returned set.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup-inv (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr y
Constructs inverse.  Returns the set of keys that @var{tr} maps to value @var{y}.  If @var{r} has no
pairs with value @var{y}, simply returns an empty set.  The returned set is of the same
implementation (WB or CHAMP) as @var{r}, and its comparison function is the key comparison function
of @var{r}.  This operation copies the set being returned.  Amortized O(@i{m} + log @i{n}), where
@i{m} is the size of the returned set.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {clear! (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr
Removes all pairs from @var{tr}, resetting it to the empty state.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {include! (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr x y
Modifies @var{tr} so that it also maps @var{x} to @var{y}.  Has no effect if this was already the
case.  Returns @var{tr}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {exclude! (transient-ch-2-relation)} @ tr x y
Modifies @var{tr} so that it does not map @var{x} to @var{y}.  Has no effect if this was already the
case.  Returns @var{tr}.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node WB-2-Relation Operations
@subsection WB-2-Relation Operations

@deffn Method {least (wb-2-relation)} @ r
If @var{r} is nonempty, returns three values: the key at rank 0 of the domain, the set of values it
is mapped to, and true; if empty, returns @code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.  O(log @i{n}).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {greatest (wb-2-relation)} @ r
If @var{r} is nonempty, returns three values: the key with the largest rank in the domain, the set
of values it is mapped to, and true; if empty, returns @code{nil}, @code{nil}, and false.  O(log
@i{n}).
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Tuples
@section Tuples

For a general description, @pxref{Dynamic Tuples}.  Dynamic tuples are currently the only
implementation of tuples.

To use tuples, you first need to declare some tuple keys.  They can also be created dynamically, but
this is less common.

@anchor{Type tuple-key}
@deftp {Data type} tuple-key
A key in a tuple.  All tuple keys must be of this type.  These print as:

@example
#<Key @var{name}>
@end example
@end deftp

@anchor{Macro define-tuple-key}
@defmac define-tuple-key name @r{&key (@var{type} 't) (@var{default} nil)} no-default? documentation
Defines a tuple key named @var{name} as a @href{Macro deflex, global lexical variable}.  If
@var{type} is supplied, @code{with} operations using this key will check that the supplied value is
of that type; @var{default} is also checked.  If @var{default} is supplied, it will be returned from
@code{lookup}, instead of @code{nil}, when the tuple has no pair with the given key.  Alternatively,
if @var{no-default?} is true, @code{lookup} will signal an error in that case.
@end defmac

@anchor{Function get-tuple-key}
@defun get-tuple-key name @r{&key (@var{type} 't) (@var{default} nil)} no-default?
Creates a tuple key or updates an existing one.  If @var{name} has not previously been used in the
current Lisp session to name a tuple key, creates a new one; otherwise, finds and updates the
existing one.  In either case, returns the key.  @var{name} should normally be a symbol, but can be
of any type known to FSet.  @var{type}, @var{default}, and @var{no-default?}  are treated as by
@code{define-tuple-key}, above.
@end defun

@defun tuple-key-name key
The name given when the key was created.
@end defun

@defun tuple-key-type key
The type of values associated with the key.
@end defun

@deftp {Data type} tuple
The abstract class for FSet functional tuples.  Subclass of @code{collection}.
@end deftp

@defun tuple? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional tuple.
@end defun

@anchor{Type dyn-tuple}
@deftp {Data type} dyn-tuple
Functional tuples implemented as dynamic tuples.  Subclass of @code{tuple}.  These print as:

@example
#~< (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1}) @dots{} >
@end example

For each key, only its name is printed, without the @code{#<Key @dots{}>}.
@end deftp

@defun dyn-tuple? x
Returns true iff @var{x} is an FSet functional dynamic tuple.
@end defun

@defun empty-tuple
@defunx empty-dyn-tuple
Returns an empty @code{dyn-tuple}.
@end defun

@anchor{Macro tuple}
@defmac tuple @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a tuple of the default implementation, currently @code{dyn-tuple},
according to the supplied argument subforms.  Each argument subform can be a list of the form
(@var{key-expr} @var{value-expr}), denoting a mapping from the value of @var{key-expr} to the value
of @var{value-expr}; or a list of the form @code{($ @var{expression})}, in which case the expression
must evaluate to a tuple, denoting all its mappings.  The result is constructed from the denoted
mappings in left-to-right order; so if a given key is supplied by more than one argument subform,
its associated value will be given by the rightmost such subform.
@end defmac

@defmac dyn-tuple @r{&rest} subforms
Constructor macro.  Constructs a @code{dyn-tuple} according to the supplied argument subforms.  Each
argument subform can be a list of the form (@var{key-expr} @var{value-expr}), denoting a mapping
from the value of @var{key-expr} to the value of @var{value-expr}; or a list of the form @code{($
@var{expression})}, in which case the expression must evaluate to a tuple, denoting all its
mappings.  The result is constructed from the denoted mappings in left-to-right order; so if a given
key is supplied by more than one argument subform, its associated value will be given by the
rightmost such subform.
@end defmac

@deffn Method {size (tuple)} @ tup
Returns the number of key/value pairs in @var{tup}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {domain (tuple)} @ tup
The set of keys in @var{tup}.  O(1).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {with (tuple)} @ tup k v
Returns a new dynamic tuple that contains all pairs of @var{tup} whose key is not @var{k}, and also
maps @var{k} to @var{v}.  If @var{tup} already maps @var{k} to a value @code{equal?} to @var{v},
returns @var{tup} itself.  If @var{k} was created with a type, checks that @var{v} is of that type,
signalling a @code{tuple-value-type-error} if not.  O(n) in the worst case, but under @href{Dynamic
tuple performance, reasonable assumptions}, typically O(1) in practice.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {lookup (tuple)} @ tup k
If @var{tup} contains key @var{k}, returns the associated value.  Otherwise, if @var{k} has a
default, returns that default.  Otherwise, signals a @code{tuple-key-unbound-error}.  O(n) in the
worst case, but under @href{Dynamic tuple performance, reasonable assumptions}, typically O(1) in
practice..
@end deffn

@deffn Method {tuple-merge (tuple tuple)} @ tup1 tup2
Returns a new tuple containing all the keys of @var{tuple1} and @var{tuple2}, where the value for
each key contained in only one tuple is the value from that tuple, and the value for each key
contained in both tuples is the result of calling @var{val-fn} on the value from @var{tuple1} and
the value from @var{tuple2}.  @var{val-fn} defaults to simply returning its second argument, so the
entries in @var{tuple2} simply shadow those in @var{tuple1}.  O(n).
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Miscellaneous Functions
@section Miscellaneous Functions

FSet exports a few ordinary functions.  They're not CLOS generic functions, but they're applicable
to many types anyway because they invoke generic functions.

@anchor{Function nonempty?}
@defun nonempty? x
Returns @code{(not (empty? @var{x}))}.
@end defun

@defun member? x coll
Returns @code{(contains? @var{coll} @var{x})}.  Personally, I prefer @code{contains?} because it
puts the collection first, as do many other FSet operations, but you might like @code{member?}
because @code{cl:member} puts the collection second.
@end defun

@defun some pred sequence0 @key{&rest} more-sequences
@defunx every pred sequence0 @key{&rest} more-sequences
@defunx notany pred sequence0 @key{&rest} more-sequences
@defunx notevery pred sequence0 @key{&rest} more-sequences
These generalize the CL builtins of the same names.  They accept any CL sequence as well as an FSet
set or sequence.  (They use @code{iterator} to obtain an @href{Stateful Iterators, iterator} over
each operand sequence.)
@end defun

@defun updated fn coll @r{&rest} keys
@defunx update fn coll @r{&rest} keys
Returns a new version of collection @var{coll} in which the element reached by doing chained
@code{lookup}s on @var{keys} is updated by calling @var{fn} on it.  For example, instead of writing

@example
(incf (@ (@ (@ foo 'a) 3) "xyzzy"))
@end example

you can write, equivalently

@example
(setq foo (updated #'1+ foo 'a 3 "xyzzy"))
@end example

This is probably most useful in contexts where you don't want to do the @code{setq} anyway, perhaps
because you're passing the result as an argument.  @var{fn} can be a function object, an fbound
symbol, or a map.

(For most of FSet's existence, this has been called @code{update}, but I recently decided that name
is too suggestive of mutation, and have deprecated it in favor of @code{updated}.)
@end defun


@c ================================================================================
@node Operations on CL Types
@section Operations on CL Types

Many of these are for compatibility, so you can shadow CL builtins with FSet operations of the same
name without breaking existing code.  Others are simply for convenience; you might find them useful
on occasion.

@deffn Method {first (list)} @ ls
Compatibility method; forwards to @code{cl:first}.    @xref{@code{first} and @code{last}}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {first (sequence)} @ s
Returns @code{(elt @var{s} 0)}.
@end deffn

@defun head ls
Returns @code{(car ls)}.  @xref{@code{head} and @code{tail}}.
@end defun

@deffn Method {with-first (list)} @ ls x
Returns @code{(cons @var{x} @var{ls})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less-first (list)} @ ls
Returns @code{(cdr @var{ls})}.
@end deffn

@defun tail ls
Returns @code{(cdr ls)}.  @xref{@code{head} and @code{tail}}.
@end defun

@deffn Method {last (list)} @ ls
Returns the last @emph{element} of @var{ls} (not its last cons!).  @xref{@code{first} and
@code{last}}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {last (sequence)} @ s
Returns @code{(elt s (1- (length s)))}.
@end deffn

@defun lastcons ls
Returns @code{(cl:last ls)}, that is, the last @emph{cons} in @var{ls}.  @xref{Divergences from
Common Lisp}.
@end defun

@deffn Method {with-last (list)} @ ls x
Returns @code{(append @var{ls} (list @var{x}))}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {less-last (list)} @ ls
Returns @code{(butlast @var{ls})}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {contains? (list)} @ ls x
Returns @code{(member @var{x} @var{ls} :test #'equal?)}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {subseq (sequence)} @ s start &optional end
Compatibility method; forwards to @code{cl:subseq}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {reverse (sequence)} @ s
Compatibility method; forwards to @code{cl:reverse}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {concat (list)} @ ls &rest more-lists
Returns the concatenation of @var{ls} with each of @var{more-lists} in succession.  @var{more-lists}
can contain anything that can be @href{Generic Function @code{convert}, convert}ed to a list, which
includes FSet collections and CL sequences.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {partition (function list)} @ pred ls
@deffnx Method {partition (symbol list)} @ pred ls
Returns, as two values, @var{ls} filtered by @var{pred}, and @var{ls} filtered by the complement of
@var{pred}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {filter (t sequence)} @ fn s
A synonym for @code{cl:remove-if-not}.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {image (function list)} @ fn ls
@deffnx Method {image (symbol list)} @ fn ls
@deffnx Method {image (map list)} @ fn ls
@c `fn' can also be a set or bag, but I'm not sure I want to document that.
Returns a list containing the values of @var{fn} applied to each element of @var{ls}, in order.
@var{fn} must be a function, an fbound symbol, or a map.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {image (function vector)} @ fn v
@deffnx Method {image (symbol vector)} @ fn v
@deffnx Method {image (map vector)} @ fn v
@c `fn' can also be a set or bag, but I'm not sure I want to document that.
Returns a simple-vector containing the values of @var{fn} applied to each element of @var{v}, in
order.  @var{fn} must be a function, an fbound symbol, or a map.
@end deffn


@deffn Method {reduce (t sequence)} @ fn s @r{&key} key initial-value start end from-end
Compatibility method; forwards to @code{cl:reduce}.
@end deffn

@anchor{find etc. compatibility methods}
@deffn Method {find (t sequence)} @ item s @r{&key} key test test-not start end from-end
@deffnx Method {find-if (t sequence)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
@deffnx Method {find-if-not (t sequence)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
@deffnx Method {count (t sequence)} @ item s @r{&key} key test test-not start end from-end
@deffnx Method {count-if (t sequence)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
@deffnx Method {count-if-not (t sequence)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
@deffnx Method {position (t sequence)} @ item s @r{&key} key test test-not start end from-end
@deffnx Method {position-if (t sequence)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
@deffnx Method {position-if-not (t sequence)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end
@deffnx Method {remove (t sequence)} @ item s @r{&key} key test test-not start end from-end count
@deffnx Method {remove-if (t sequence)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end count
@deffnx Method {remove-if-not (t sequence)} @ pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end count
@deffnx Method {substitute (t sequence)} @ newitem olditem s @r{&key} key test test-not start end from-end count
@deffnx Method {substitute-if (t sequence)} @ newitem pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end count
@deffnx Method {substitute-if-not (t sequence)} @ newitem pred s @r{&key} key start end from-end count
@deffnx Method {search (sequence sequence)} @ sequence-1 sequence-2 @r{&key} test key from-end start1 start2 end1 end2
@deffnx Method {mismatch (sequence sequence)} @ sequence-1 sequence-2 @r{&key} test key from-end start1 start2 end1 end2
Compatibility methods; they all forward to the CL builtin of the same name.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {iterator (sequence)} @ s
@deffnx Method {iterator (list)} @ s
@deffnx Method {iterator (vector)} @ s
@deffnx Method {iterator (string)} @ s
Returns a @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator} over @var{s}, a list, vector, string, or
other sequence (if the implementation has other sequence types).
@end deffn

@deffn Method {fun-iterator (sequence)} @ s @r{&key} from-end?
@deffnx Method {fun-iterator (list)} @ s @r{&key} from-end?
@deffnx Method {fun-iterator (vector)} @ s @r{&key} from-end?
@deffnx Method {fun-iterator (string)} @ s @r{&key} from-end?
Returns a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator} over @var{s}, a list, vector, string, or
other sequence (if the implementation has other sequence types).  If @var{from-end?} is true, the
iteration will be in reverse order.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {sort (sequence t)} @ s pred @r{&key} key
@deffnx Method {stable-sort (sequence t)} @ s pred @r{&key} key
Compatibility methods; forward to @code{cl:sort} or @code{cl:stable-sort} respectively.  Copies
@var{s} first, however, so unlike the CL builtins, these never mutate their operands.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {union (list list)} @ l1 l2 @r{&key} test test-not
@deffnx Method {intersection (list list)} @ l1 l2 @r{&key} test test-not
@deffnx Method {set-difference (list list)} @ l1 l2 @r{&key} test test-not
Compatibility methods; forward to the CL builtin of the same name.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {compose (function function)} @ f1 f2
@deffnx Method {compose (function symbol)} @ f1 f2
@deffnx Method {compose (symbol function)} @ f1 f2
@deffnx Method {compose (symbol symbol)} @ f1 f2
Returns the composition of @var{f1} with @var{f2}.  @code{multiple-value-call} is used to pass all
values returned by @var{f1} as arguments to @var{f2}.
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Error Types
@section Error Types

There are not many cases in which FSet signals an error; most operations that can fail return a
success flag as an additional value instead.  But there are a few error cases.

@deftp Condition lookup-error @r{(error)}
An abstract superclass for errors signalled by @code{lookup} methods.
@end deftp

@deftp Condition map-domain-error @r{(lookup-error)} map key
The condition signalled when @code{lookup} is called on a map and a key that is not in the map, and
the map has no @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default}.
@end deftp

@deftp Condition seq-bounds-error @r{(lookup-error)} seq index
The condition signalled when @code{lookup} is called on a seq and an index that is out of bounds for
the seq, and the seq has no @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default}.
@end deftp

@deftp Condition empty-seq-error @r{(lookup-error)} seq
The condition signalled when @code{first} or @code{last} is called on an empty seq, and the seq has
no @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default}.
@end deftp

@deftp Condition tuple-value-type-error @r{(type-error)} key datum expected-type
The condition signalled when @code{with} is called on a tuple, key, and value, such that the value
is not of the correct type for the key.
@end deftp

@deftp Condition tuple-key-unbound-error @r{(lookup-error)} tuple key
The condition signalled when @code{lookup} is called on a tuple and a key, when the key is not in
the tuple.
@end deftp


@c ================================================================================
@node The Bleeding Edge
@section The Bleeding Edge

There are a few classes in the FSet codebase that I don't consider ready for general use, even
though they've been there for years.  Either they aren't well tested, or I don't feel they're
designed quite right, or they don't have all the operations I think people would want, or some
combination of these.  You should not consider them part of the stable API.  But, as I say, they've
been lying around for a long time, and a few people may have used them, so I feel I should mention
them briefly.  See the code for the details.

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node List Relations and Query Registries
@subsection List Relations and Query Registries

I wrote these for my own use, so they do have some real-world testing.  A list relation is like a
relational table, where each row is a list --- confusingly, the code calls them ``tuples'', though
they're not @href{Tuples, FSet tuples}.  It has a fixed arity: all rows in a relation must have
length equal to that arity.  There are some query operations that retrieve rows from the relation
given patterns the rows must match.

A query registry can be used with one or more list relations of different arities to provide a
simple trigger mechanism, to detect when rows about to be added to the database match any of a set
of registered queries.  Row patterns can be registered along with query objects; there is an
operation to take a row and return the set of query objects associated with registered patterns that
match the row.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Interval Sets
@subsection Interval Sets

An interval set holds a collection of intervals, with automatic merging of overlapping and abutting
intervals.  The domain need not be numeric, but does need to be totally ordered (for instance, you
could use strings compared lexicographically).  An interval has a lower and upper bound and can be
open or closed at either end (all four possibilities are supported).  Union, intersection, and
set-difference operations are available.

I never used this, though I once thought I was going to; it should be considered untested.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Bounded Sets
@subsection Bounded Sets

In some cases, when you're working with sets, you can know in advance that the sets you're building
are all subsets (not necessarily proper) of some set you can compute; call this set the
``universe''.  If you're also going to be doing a lot of bulk set operations --- union,
intersection, and/or set-difference --- you can take advantage of knowing the universe to get very
fast implementations of these operations.  Bounded sets make it easy to do so.

To create a bounded set, you supply the universe and a subset thereof (again, not necessarily a
proper subset).  The subset is converted to a bit vector, represented as a Lisp integer.  CL's
builtin operations @code{logior}, @code{logand}, and @code{logandc2} are then used to compute
unions, intersections, and set-differences between bounded sets which all have the same universe.

To get maximum performance, make sure you use only one instance of each universe set (it can be
either a @code{ch-set} or a @code{wb-set}), which you use to create the bounded sets.  The
operations have to first check that the two sets have the same universe, and this check is much
faster if they're @code{eq} than if they're distinct but equal.

