@node Conceptual Background
@chapter Conceptual Background

This chapter makes some observations about types in programming languages that, frankly, I think all
programmers should be familiar with.  I encourage everyone to read it.

@hrule{}


@c ================================================================================
@node What Is a Functional Datatype?
@section What Is a Functional Datatype?

You may have noticed that I refer to FSet collections as ``functional'' rather than ``immutable''.
There is more to functional semantics than mere immutability: functional collections also support
``functional update'' operations: operations that take a collection and return a new collection that
is different in some specified way.  Some ``immutable'' collections libraries do not provide these.

Functional collections are therefore also @dfn{persistent}, in the
@uref{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persistent_data_structure, data-structure sense}: since
performing a functional update returns a new collection, the collection in its previous state still
exists and can be operated on further if desired.  (The term ``persistent'' is also used for data
written to nonvolatile storage; this meaning is not intended here.)

To develop an exact definition of functional collections, or functional datatypes in general, let me
start with some simple examples in C++ and Java.  The first could be in either language:

@example
    int a = 3;
    int b = a;
    ++a;     // b is unchanged
@end example

Simple, right?  Everyone knows that incrementing @code{a} doesn't affect @code{b}.  This is because
the type @code{int} has an @dfn{immediate} implementation: there is no way that @code{b} could be an
@emph{alias} of @code{a}, because the assignment copies the value itself, not a pointer to the
value.  We say that @code{int} has @dfn{value semantics}.

Now consider this, in Java:

@example
    int[] a = @{ 3 @};
    int[] b = a;
    a[0] = 4;    // b is also affected
@end example

Here we see a case where assignment creates an alias to a mutable object, so that mutations to the
object are visible through the alias.  This example demonstrates @dfn{reference semantics}.

Interestingly, to have reference semantics, a type must be aliasing (meaning that assignment creates
an alias) @emph{and} mutable.  C++, for instancee, has collection types that are mutable but not
aliasing:

@example
    std::vector<int> a@{3@};
    std::vector<int> b = a;
    a[0] = 4;   // b is unchanged!
@end example

Why is @code{b} not an alias of @code{a}?  Because @code{std::vector} redefines assignment to copy
the contents.  So even though the implementation is @dfn{pointer-mediated} --- as opposed to
immediate, like @code{int} --- the class arranges for assignment not to create an alias.  (Of
course, this being C++, you could create an alias using an explicit reference or pointer, but let's
leave that aside.  And yes, C++ pedants, I am overlooking the distinction between initialization and
assignment, which doesn't matter for this discussion.)

Curiously enough, the result is that (in the absence of explicit references or pointers) the
standard C++ collections have value semantics despite being mutable!  I said above that the Java
@code{int[]} example shows a case where assignment creates an alias to a mutable object.  Here we
see that both aspects are required: the type must be aliasing @emph{and} mutable to have reference
semantics; otherwise, it has value semantics.

Let's have another look at that first example:

@example
    int a = 3;
    int b = a;
    ++a;     // b is unchanged
@end example

How do we want to describe the action performed by the third statement?  The usual way is to say
that @code{++a} is an abbreviation for @code{a = a + 1}; and that's valid.  But interestingly, it's
equally valid to consider @code{int} to be a mutable but unaliasing type, like @code{std::vector}.
We could just as well say that the increment operation is mutating @code{a} in place; in fact,
that's often how we think about it, and it's also very likely to be how it's implemented at the
machine-instruction level.  We see, then, that if a type is unaliasing, the mutable/immutable
distinction no longer has the force we expect: it no longer determines whether the type has
reference or value semantics.

So the first requirement for a @dfn{functional} datatype is simply that it have value semantics.
@c &&& My intention here is to define a functional datatype as one appropriate for functional
@c programming.  Value semantics is necessary, but it also needs an efficiently persistent
@c implementation and (if immutable) well-chosen functional update operators.  I should explain the
@c term ``functional update'' here too.  (Or call these ``delta operators''??)

Okay, back to Common Lisp and FSet.  Collections have to have pointer-mediated implementations
because they're of arbitrary size, and Common Lisp gives us no way to redefine assignment.  So
aliasing is forced on us.  (This is true of most languages.)  To get value semantics, then, the FSet
types must be immutable.  As we will see, though, FSet provides operations that superficially
resemble mutations; in practice, you can mentally pretend that FSet types are mutable but
unaliasing, like @code{std::vector}, although that's not how they're actually implemented --- the
apparently mutating operations are constructing a new representation and assigning it back to the
variable holding the collection.

If that sounds odd to you as a CL programmer, let me assure you that it is not.  Consider this
example:

@example
    (let* ((a (list 4))
          (b a))
      (push a 3))   ; b is unchanged
@end example

Here the @code{push} form expands to @code{(setq a (cons 3 a))}, which obviously doesn't touch
@code{b}.  Although Lisp lists are technically a reference type, since cons cells can be mutated, in
practice they are rarely mutated once they are fully constructed.  (By ``fully constructed'' I'm
referring to the fact that lists are often built backwards and then reversed in place with
@code{nreverse}; usually, once that reversal is done, the list is fully constructed.)  So Lisp lists
are almost always used as a functional type, and the language supports this usage fairly well.


@c ================================================================================
@node Is Lisp a Functional Language?
@section Is Lisp a Functional Language?

@c &&& Fill this out, or remove it.
Lisp is often referred to as one of the earliest functional languages, but the way the term
``functional'' is used has shifted over time.


@c ================================================================================
@node A Brief Introduction to Big-O
@section A Brief Introduction to Big-O

This book uses ``Big-O'' notation to characterize the time complexity of operations.  While most
readers are probably familiar with it, a few may not be; I thought I should go over the basics.  You
should definitely skip this section if you have studied the topic.

Time complexity --- more accurately, @emph{asymptotic} time complexity --- is a way to characterize
how the worst-case running time of an algorithm grows with the size of its input, as that input gets
arbitrarily large.  It is not the only important measure of performance!  If you have two
implementations of an algorithm, one of which always takes 100 times longer than the other ---
perhaps it is running on a very slow interpreter --- these two implementations nonetheless have the
same time complexity.  Time complexity abstracts away from these constant-factor differences to
focus on the dependence of running time on input size.

Imagine, for example, that there is some function we want to compute on collections of some kind,
and that we have two algorithms to do it.  One of these works by performing some simple operation on
every pair of elements of the input.  If the collection is of size @i{n}, there are @i{n}@sup{2}
such pairs; so the time taken by this algorithm must grow proportionally.  The other algorithm,
let's suppose, performs a more complex operation on every element by itself; let's suppose for the
moment that this more complex operation takes time independent of the size of the collection; so the
time taken by the algorithm is proportional to the size of the input.

Even if the first algorithm is faster for small inputs --- even if it's @emph{much} faster --- the
fact that its running time grows as the square of the size of the input means that there @emph{must}
exist an input large enough that the second algorithm will beat the first on that input; and as the
input gets larger yet, the second algorithm's advantage will only grow.

We say that the first algorithm has quadratic or O(@i{n}@sup{2}) time complexity, and the second has
linear or O(@i{n}) time complexity.  Some commonly encountered complexity classes --- including the
ones used in this book --- are, in increasing order:

@table @asis
@item constant, O(1)
The running time is independent of the size of the input.

@item logarithmic, O(log @i{n})
The running time is proportional to the logarithm of the size of the input.  Note that the base of
the logarithm doesn't matter, because logarithms of different bases are related by a constant
factor, and time complexity abstracts away constant factors.

It is common for algorithms to have logarithmic time complexity when they involve splitting the
input into roughly-equally-sized partitions, selecting one of those, and repeating until the current
partition picks out a single element.  A familiar example is binary search on a sorted vector, which
maintains a range of indices within which the value being searched for must lie if present; at each
iteration, it compares the item at the center of that range against the search key, and based on the
result of that comparison, discards the top or bottom half of the range.  Finding a path through an
ordered binary tree similarly discards half the remaining tree at each step.

@item linear, O(@i{n})
The running time grows at the same rate as the size of the input.  Algorithms that perform an
operation on every element of the input must have at least linear time complexity.

@item linearithmic, O(@i{n} log @i{n})
The running time grows as the size of the input times its logarithm, that is, slightly faster than
linearly.  Algorithms that perform an operation on every element of the input, where the time for
that operation is logarithmic in the size, will have this time complexity.  Many sorting algorithms
are in this class.

@item quadratic, O(@i{n}@sup{2})
The running time grows as the square of the size of the input.
@end table

@emph{Most} of the time, in practice, constant-time operations are very fast --- they could require
as little as one machine instruction --- and logarithmic-time operations are fast enough not to
worry about.  Linear time is generally acceptable for bulk operations, and linearithmic (O(@i{n} log
@i{n})) time isn't much worse --- again, the difference is rarely worth worrying about.  And these
tend to be the best time complexities possible for many bulk operations (e.g. sorting), anyway.
Quadratic time has the potential to be a problem, though in practice, people do live with quadratic
or even cubic (O(@i{n}@sup{3})) algorithms when nothing better is available.  Beyond that are all
the higher-order polynomials, and then exponential time (O(@i{k}@sup{@i{n}}) for some constant
@i{k}) --- these are considered increasingly intractable.

Again, time complexity is not all there is to performance; there are situations where
constant-factor differences are more important.  But usually, time complexity is the first
consideration, because when programs are put to actual use, there tend to be at least a few users
who run them on very large inputs.

One more point, about the word ``asymptotic''.  This refers to the time taken by the algorithm as
the input size grows @emph{without bound}.  So it's not something you can measure, because all
measurements must be made with specific, finite inputs.  It can be arrived at only by analysis of
the algorithm in question.  The most that measurements can tell you is how the algorithm performs on
a certain range of input sizes.


@c ================================================================================
@node The Common Lisp Object System
@section The Common Lisp Object System

This section is intended for readers unfamiliar with Common Lisp.  It is not a full treatment of
CLOS, the Common Lisp Object System, but should provide enough background that you can understand
the rest of this book.

CLOS is unusual, among object-oriented languages, in several ways:

@itemize
@item
Common Lisp was not designed from scratch as an object-oriented language; CLOS was added on to it
relatively late in its evolution.  There were other OO extensions to Lisp that preceded it and
influenced its design, notably Flavors on the MIT Lisp Machine and LOOPS in Xerox Interlisp-D.

@item
CLOS organizes functionality quite differently from most OO languages.  A class definition specifies
only the class's data: its superclasses and slots (fields).  It does not specify the methods on the
class.  Instead, @dfn{generic functions} abstract the notion of an operation that can be invoked on
different classes; each method is associated with a generic function.

Imagine a hierarchy of classes with methods in a mainstream OO language.  For each method, either it
overrides a method of the same name in a superclass, or it does not; the latter we call root
methods.  Consider a single root method and all the subclass methods that override it; that's the
set of methods that forms a generic function.
@item
CLOS supports multiple dispatch.  Each method on a generic function has a list of @dfn{specializers}
defining a list of parameter types on which the method is appiicable.  Invocation of a generic
function on a list of arguments (conceptually) scans the methods of the generic function, to find
the method whose specializers best match the types of the arguments, then dispatches to that method.
(A caching mechanism makes this much cheaper, in practice, than it sounds.)

The language spec has a detailed definition of what ``best match'' means here, but the short version
is that since there are subtyping relationships involved, we want a method whose specializers are
more specific to shadow one whose specializers are less specific, when the arguments are of the more
specific types.  In the single-dispatch case, this generates the familiar overriding behavior of
other OO languages: a method on a subclass overrides one of the same name on a superclass.
@item
The classes available to be specialized on are not limited to those the user has defined; CL defines
a hierarchy of built-in classes that can also be used.  The class named @code{t} is the top of the
hierarchy, the class of all objects.  When no specializer is explicitly given for a parameter of a
method, the specializer defaults to @code{t}.

CLOS also provides a way to specialize a method parameter on a symbol, so that the method will be
called only when that specific symbol is passed.  FSet uses this for its generic function
@href{Generic Function @code{convert}, @code{convert}}, to specify the intended conversion.
@end itemize

Here's the first line of a sample entry from the API Reference chapter:

@deffn Method {find-if (t set)} @ pred s @r{&key} key
@end deffn

Here @code{find-if} is the generic function, and @code{(t set)} is the list of specializers.  This
method will be invoked on a call whose second argument is a set.  The required parameters are
@var{pred} and @code{s}; @code{s} will be bound to the set.

For brevity, I have usually omitted trailing @code{t} specializers in this book, since they have no
effect on method selection.

Oh, maybe I should say a little about optional and keyword parameters.  CL has both of these, marked
in parameter lists by @code{&optional} and @code{&key} respectively.  Optional parameters match
arguments by position; for keyword parameters, the argument must be preceded by the parameter name
as a keyword symbol (@i{i.e.}, preceded by a colon).  Both optional and keyword parameters may be
given default values in the parameter list; the default default is @code{nil}.  Examples:

@example
(defun foo (x &optional y (z 0)) ...)
(defun bar (x &key y (z 3)) ...)
;;; some possible calls
(foo 17)             ; x = 17, y = nil, z = 0
(foo 17 42)          ; x = 17, y = 42, z = 0
(foo 17 42 19)       ; x = 17, y = 42, z = 19
(bar 22)             ; x = 22, y = nil, z = 3
(bar 22 :z 7)        ; x = 22, y = nil, z = 7
(bar 22 :z 7 :y 13)  ; x = 22, y = 13, z = 7
@end example

