@node Generic Function @code{convert}
@chapter Generic Function @code{convert}

The @code{convert} generic function provides convenient conversions between many FSet types.  It is
called with the first argument @var{to-type} being a symbol --- normally a quoted constant --- that
specifies the target type of the conversion, and the second argument being the collection to be
converted.  (This is the opposite order from @code{cl:coerce}.)  Many methods have additional
keyword parameters to further specify details of the conversion.

When @code{to-type} is one of the abstract types -- @code{set}, @code{bag}, @code{map} etc. -- the
only guarantee is that @code{convert} will return an instance of the requested type.  The choices of
implementation and organization are up to FSet, and there's no option to request a specific
organization.  In contrast, when @code{to-type} is one of the concrete types -- @code{wb-set},
@code{ch-set}, @code{wb-map}, etc. -- the @code{convert} method accepts keyword arguments specifying
the organization (e.g.  @code{compare-fn-name}), and guarantees to return a collection of that type
and organization; including the case where no organization is specified, in which @code{convert} is
guaranteed to return a collection of the default organization (the one using @code{fset:compare}).

Method summary:

@c The "@item @" lines make a blank line in the table.
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .3 .3
@c @headitem to-type @tab collection type @tab notes
@item @b{to-type (symbol)} @tab @b{collection type} @tab @b{notes}
@item set @tab set @tab 0
@item ch-set @tab set @tab 15
@item ch-set @tab ch-set @tab 0, 15
@item wb-set @tab set @tab 0, 15
@item wb-set @tab wb-set @tab 0, 15
@item set @tab list @tab 2
@item ch-set @tab list @tab 15
@item wb-set @tab list @tab 15, 18
@item set @tab seq @tab 2
@item ch-set @tab seq @tab 15
@item wb-set @tab seq @tab 15, 18
@item set @tab sequence @tab 2, 21
@item ch-set @tab sequence @tab 15, 21
@item wb-set @tab sequence @tab 15, 18, 21
@item list @tab set @tab
@item vector @tab set @tab
@item @
@item bag @tab bag @tab 0
@item ch-bag @tab bag @tab 15
@item ch-bag @tab ch-bag @tab 0, 15
@item wb-bag @tab bag @tab 15
@item wb-bag @tab wb-bag @tab 0, 15
@item bag @tab set @tab 2
@item bag @tab wb-set @tab 1
@item ch-bag @tab set @tab 15
@item ch-bag @tab ch-set @tab 9, 15
@item wb-bag @tab set @tab 15
@item wb-bag @tab wb-set @tab 9, 15
@item set @tab wb-bag @tab 1
@item wb-set @tab wb-bag @tab 15
@item set @tab ch-bag @tab 2
@item ch-set @tab ch-bag @tab 15
@item bag @tab list @tab 2, 3, 4
@item ch-bag @tab list @tab 3, 4, 15
@item wb-bag @tab list @tab 3, 4, 15, 18
@item bag @tab seq @tab 2, 3
@item ch-bag @tab seq @tab 3, 15
@item wb-bag @tab seq @tab 3, 15, 18
@item bag @tab sequence @tab 1, 3, 21
@item ch-bag @tab sequence @tab 3, 21
@item wb-bag @tab sequence @tab 3, 15, 18, 21
@item list @tab bag @tab 3
@item seq @tab bag @tab 3
@item vector @tab bag @tab 3
@item alist @tab bag @tab
@item @
@item map @tab map @tab 0
@item ch-map @tab map @tab 16, 20
@item wb-map @tab map @tab 16, 20
@item ch-map @tab ch-map @tab 0, 16, 20
@item wb-map @tab wb-map @tab 0, 16, 20
@item map @tab list @tab 2, 6, 7, 18, 19
@item ch-map @tab list @tab 6, 7, 16, 19
@item wb-map @tab list @tab 6, 7, 16, 18, 19
@item map @tab seq @tab 2, 6, 7, 19
@item ch-map @tab seq @tab 6, 7, 16, 19
@item wb-map @tab seq @tab 6, 7, 16, 18, 19
@item map @tab sequence @tab 2, 6, 7, 19, 21
@item ch-map @tab sequence @tab 6, 7, 16, 19, 21
@item wb-map @tab sequence @tab 6, 7, 16, 18, 19, 21
@item map @tab bag @tab 2, 19
@item ch-map @tab bag @tab 16, 19
@item wb-map @tab bag @tab 16, 19
@item map @tab hash-table @tab 2, 19
@item ch-map @tab hash-table @tab 16, 19
@item wb-map @tab hash-table @tab 16, 19
@item set @tab map @tab 2, 5
@item list @tab map @tab 5
@item alist @tab map @tab
@item seq @tab map @tab 5
@item vector @tab map @tab 5
@item hash-table @tab map @tab 8
@item @
@item seq @tab seq @tab 0
@item wb-seq @tab wb-seq @tab 0
@item seq @tab list @tab 1, 9, 23
@item wb-seq @tab list @tab 9, 23
@item seq @tab vector @tab 1, 9
@item wb-seq @tab vector @tab 9
@item seq @tab set @tab 1
@item wb-seq @tab set @tab
@item seq @tab bag @tab 1, 3, 5
@item wb-seq @tab bag @tab 3, 5
@item seq @tab map @tab 1, 5, 19
@item wb-seq @tab map @tab 5, 19
@item list @tab wb-seq @tab
@item vector @tab wb-seq @tab
@item string @tab wb-seq @tab 14
@item base-string @tab wb-seq @tab 14
@item @
@item 2-relation @tab 2-relation @tab 0
@item ch-2-relation @tab ch-2-relation @tab 0, 16
@item wb-2-relation @tab wb-2-relation @tab 0, 16
@item 2-relation @tab set @tab 6, 2
@item ch-2-relation @tab set @tab 6, 16
@item wb-2-relation @tab set @tab 6, 16
@item set @tab ch-2-relation @tab 2, 5
@item set @tab wb-2-relation @tab 1, 5
@item ch-set @tab 2-relation @tab 5
@item wb-set @tab 2-relation @tab 5
@item 2-relation @tab ch-map @tab 2, 10
@item ch-2-relation @tab ch-map @tab 2, 10, 16
@item 2-relation @tab wb-map @tab 1, 10
@item wb-2-relation @tab wb-map @tab 10, 16
@item 2-relation @tab list @tab 2, 6
@item ch-2-relation @tab list @tab 6, 16
@item wb-2-relation @tab list @tab 6, 16
@item 2-relation @tab seq @tab 2, 6
@item ch-2-relation @tab seq @tab 6, 16
@item wb-2-relation @tab seq @tab 6, 16
@item map @tab wb-2-relation @tab 1, 11, 19
@item map @tab ch-2-relation @tab 2, 11, 19
@item wb-map @tab wb-2-relation @tab 11, 16, 19
@item ch-map @tab ch-2-relation @tab 11, 16, 19
@item map-to-sets @tab ch-2-relation @tab 12
@item map-to-sets @tab wb-2-relation @tab 12
@item list @tab 2-relation @tab 5
@item @
@item tuple @tab tuple @tab 0
@item dyn-tuple @tab dyn-tuple @tab 0
@item map @tab tuple @tab 2
@item ch-map @tab tuple @tab 16
@item wb-map @tab tuple @tab 16
@item tuple @tab map @tab 13, 17
@item dyn-tuple @tab map @tab 17
@item list @tab tuple @tab 5
@item tuple @tab list @tab 6, 7, 13
@item dyn-tuple @tab list @tab 7
@item @
@item replay-set @tab replay-set @tab 0
@item wb-replay-set @tab replay-set @tab 15
@item ch-replay-set @tab replay-set @tab 15
@item wb-replay-set @tab wb-replay-set @tab 0, 15
@item ch-replay-set @tab ch-replay-set @tab 0, 15
@item seq @tab replay-set @tab 1, 22
@item wb-seq @tab replay-set @tab 22
@item set @tab ch-replay-set @tab 2, 22
@item ch-set @tab ch-replay-set @tab 15, 22
@item set @tab wb-replay-set @tab 1, 22
@item wb-set @tab wb-replay-set @tab 15, 22
@item replay-set @tab list @tab 2
@item ch-replay-set @tab list @tab 15
@item wb-replay-set @tab list @tab 15
@item replay-set @tab seq @tab 2
@item ch-replay-set @tab seq @tab 15
@item wb-replay-set @tab seq @tab 15
@item replay-set @tab sequence @tab 2, 21
@item ch-replay-set @tab sequence @tab 15, 21
@item wb-replay-set @tab sequence @tab 15, 21
@item list @tab replay-set @tab
@item vector @tab replay-set @tab
@item @
@item replay-map @tab replay-map @tab 0
@item wb-replay-map @tab wb-replay-map @tab 0
@item ch-replay-map @tab ch-replay-map @tab 0
@item map @tab wb-replay-map @tab 1
@item map @tab ch-replay-map @tab 2
@item wb-map @tab wb-replay-map @tab
@item ch-map @tab ch-replay-map @tab
@item replay-map @tab list @tab 2, 6
@item wb-replay-map @tab list @tab 6
@item replay-map @tab seq @tab 2, 6
@item wb-replay-map @tab seq @tab 6
@item replay-map @tab sequence @tab 2, 6, 21
@item wb-replay-map @tab sequence @tab 6, 21
@item list @tab replay-map @tab 5, 24
@item vector @tab replay-map @tab 5, 24
@item seq @tab replay-map @tab 5, 19, 24
@item wb-seq @tab replay-map @tab 5, 19, 24
@item @
@item list @tab list @tab 0
@item vector @tab vector @tab 0
@item list @tab sequence @tab 21
@item vector @tab sequence @tab 21
@item string @tab sequence @tab 21
@item base-string @tab sequence @tab 21
@end multitable

Notes:

@enumerate 0
@item @ilc{0}
Identity conversion, provided for convenience.  (If the method also accepts an organization, then it
performs the identity conversion only if the organization of the argument matches that requested.)
@item @ilc{1}
Constructs the WB-tree implementation of its type (@code{wb-set} etc.).
@item @ilc{2}
Constructs the CHAMP implementation of its type (@code{ch-set} etc.).
@item @ilc{3}
Has keyword parameter @var{pairs?}.  If true, treats the input elements as pairs (represented as
conses) of a value and a count (multiplicity).
@item @ilc{4}
Has keyword parameter @var{from-type}.  If it's the symbol @code{alist}, treats the input elements as pairs
(as conses) of a value and a count.  Deprecated; use @var{pairs?}.
@item @ilc{5}
Has keyword parameter @var{pair-fn}, defaulting to @code{#'cons}, which specifies the function used
to combine each key/value pair.
@item @ilc{6}
Has keyword parameters @var{key-fn} and @var{value-fn}, used to extract a key/value pair from each
input element.  Defaults are @code{#'car} and @code{#'cdr}.
@item @ilc{7}
If a key occurs more than once in the input, the result will have the value associated with the last
occurrence.
@item @ilc{8}
All keyword arguments are forwarded to @code{make-hash-table}.
@item @ilc{9}
Optimized O(n) algorithm.
@item @ilc{10}
Has keyword parameter @var{from-type}.  If it's the symbol @code{map-to-sets}, the range elements
must all be sets, and the result pairs each domain element with each element of the corresponding
range set.  Otherwise, the result pairs each domain element with the corresponding range element
directly.
@item @ilc{11}
The relation must be a function (must have only one range value per domain value).  @xref{Method
conflicts (2-relation)}.
@item @ilc{12}
Returns a map mapping each domain value to the set of corresponding range values.  The default of
the result is the empty set.
@item @ilc{13}
Constructs a @code{dyn-tuple}.
@item @ilc{14}
Always returns a string (or base-string, if specified).  Signals a @code{non-char-seq-error} if the
seq contains a non-character.  Signals a @code{type-error} if a base-string is specified and it
encounters a non-base character.
@item @ilc{15}
Has keyword parameter @var{compare-fn-name}.  If nonnull, must be a symbol, the name of the comparison
function to be used.  The returned set will be converted, if necessary, to use the specified
function, or to use @code{compare} if one is not specified.
@item @ilc{16}
Has keyword parameters @var{key-compare-fn-name} band @var{val-compare-fn-name}.  If nonnull, these
must be symbols, the names of the key and value comparison functions, respectively, to be used.  The
returned map will be converted, if necessary, to use the specified functions, or to use
@code{compare} for those not specified.
@item @ilc{17}
Has keyword parameter @var{autokey?}.  if true, then any keys of the map that are not instances of
@code{tuple-key} are automatically converted to such instances using @href{Function get-tuple-key,
@code{get-tuple-key}}.
@item @ilc{18}
Has keyword parameter @var{input-sorted?}.  If true, uses an algorithm optimized for the case where
the input is sorted: it runs in O(n) time and is much faster, but is substantially @emph{slower}
than the default algorithm if the input is completely unsorted.  ``Sorted'' here means that the
input is in the same order as the collection being built.  The algorithm's correctness doesn't
depend on the sorting, only its performance; so it's okay if a few elements are out of order.
@item @ilc{19}
Has keyword parameter @var{default}, which specifies the default of the result; if not supplied, the
default is @code{nil}.  Also has keyword parameter @var{no-default?} to specify no default.
@item @ilc{20}
Has keyword parameter @var{default}, which specifies the default of the result; if not supplied, the
default is the same as that of the argument.  Also has keyword parameter @var{no-default?}  to
specify no default.
@item @ilc{21}
@code{sequence} here refers to a CL sequence -- either a list or a vector, unless the implementation
has more sequence subtypes.  FSet's @code{seq} is not a subtype of @code{sequence}.
@item @ilc{22}
O(1), provided the implementation and organization, if applicable, are unchanged.
@item @ilc{23}
Has keyword parameter @var{reverse?}, which if true, reverses the order.
@item @ilc{24}
Has keyword parameter @var{keys-only?}; if true, converts the key sequence to the target type,
omitting the values and ignoring @var{pair-fn}.  If it's true and @var{to-type} is @code{seq} or
@code{wb-seq}, the conversion is O(1).
@end enumerate
