@node FSet Data Structures
@chapter FSet Data Structures

There's a lot of detail in this chapter that you don't need to know when you're just getting started
with FSet.  So I'm giving you an advance TL;DR:

@itemize
@item
Most FSet types have two implementations, one called ``WB'' and the other ``CHAMP''.  CHAMP has
better performance and is used by default, but there are sometimes reasons to use WB.

@item
FSet organizes most of its collections using generic functions @code{compare} and @code{hash-value}.
It is possible to use your own comparison and hashing functions, but it's rarely necessary.

@item
When you come to the point of wanting to place instances of user-defined classes in FSet
collections, you will have to give FSet some information about how to compare and hash them.  At
that point,  you should read, at least, @ref{User-Defined Classes}.
@end itemize

Advanced users, along with language and library designers, will probably find this chapter worth
reading closely; others might want to skip ahead, at this point, to the next chapter.

Most FSet collections are implemented in two ways.  The original data structure I used was
weight-balanced binary trees; this is an ordering-based implementation.  More recently, I have added
a hash-based data structure called CHAMP, which has better performance in most scenarios; the CHAMP
implementations are now the default for sets, maps, and bags.

Both of these data structures are trees, that are functionally ``updated'' by path copying: given a
point in the tree at which an update is to be applied, that node or leaf and all the nodes above it,
up to and including the root, are copied, with the necessary change being applied to the copy.  As
such, operations on them have the same time complexities.

@c ================================================================================
@node Weight-Balanced Trees
@section Weight-Balanced Trees

Weight-balanced trees (@dfn{WB-trees}) were the subject of a 1992 paper by Stephen Adams [&&& ref].
The details of the balancing strategy are not important here; what matters is that these are ordered
binary trees.  FSet's implementation of them is heterogeneous, in the sense that the leaves of the
tree, instead of holding a single element or key/value pair each, are vectors holding several of
these.  The length of these vectors is bounded by a constant.  The result is that the lowest two or
three levels of the tree are gathered into these vectors, saving the space that would otherwise be
taken by their tree nodes, with little or no impact on time performance.

FSet has WB-tree implementations of sets, maps, bags, and seqs, named @code{wb-set}, @code{wb-map},
@code{wb-bag}, and @code{wb-seq} respectively.  Point updates --- inserting an element or pair,
removing one, updating the value associated with a map key, etc. --- take O(log @i{n}) time.  On
seqs, subsequence and concatenation also take O(log @i{n}) time.  Operatiions that combine two trees
in some way --- @code{union}, @code{intersection}, etc. --- take O(@i{n}) time in general, though
under certain specific circumstances this can be reduced to O(log @i{n}).

For sets, maps, and bags --- the @dfn{setlike} types --- FSet explicitly provides for the case where
two elements or keys are incomparable, meaning that they're not equal, but the comparison function
does not place them in an order.  (This situation arises rarely, but it does occur, so FSet provides
for it.)  As long as the sets of incomparable values remain small, the performance impact is minor;
though if they were to grow unboundedly, operations that normally take logarithmic time would take
linear time, and those that normally take linear time would take quadratic time.  The time
complexities given in this book assume that these sets remain of bounded size.

@c ================================================================================
@node CHAMP Trees
@section CHAMP Trees

CHAMP (Compressed Hash-Array Mapped Prefix-tree) is the subject of a 2017
@uref{https://michael.steindorfer.name/publications/phd-thesis-efficient-immutable-collections.pdf,
Ph.D. dissertation} by Michael Steindorfer.  It's an evolution of the Hash Array-Mapped Trie (HAMT)
invented by Phil Bagwell in 2001 [&&& ref; see Steindorfer].

CHAMP, like HAMT, is hash-based, rather than ordering-based.  FSet's CHAMP collections are
significantly faster than the WB-tree collections at simple operations such as element/key updates
and lookups, and several times faster at operations that combine two collections in some way:
equality testing, union, intersection, etc.  However, CHAMP is appropriate only for setlike types;
there's no CHAMP alternative to the WB-tree seqs.

So FSet has CHAMP implementations of sets, maps, and bags, named @code{ch-set}, @code{ch-map}, and
@code{ch-bag} respectively.  As with the WB-tree types, point updates take O(log @i{n}) time, but
the constant factors are smaller.  The combining operations --- @code{union}, @code{intersection},
etc. --- are @emph{much} faster on CHAMP; a factor of 4 seems to be typical, and I've seen it go as
high as 10.

One downside is that the order in which CHAMP yields elements during iteration is a rather complex
function of their hash values.  This ordering will appear random --- it isn't actually random, but
it won't make any sense from the application's perspective.

In the event of a hash collision, where two unequal values nonetheless have the same hash value,
FSet's CHAMP implementation stores the collision sets as WB-trees within the CHAMP tree.  This keeps
the time complexities of operations down (e.g., insertion remains logarithmic) even when collision
sets grow unboundedly, provided the comparison function can order most pairs of values.  This design
choice reduces the pressure on the hash function to return unique values, which in turn can have
performance benefits.  For example, if the keys of a CHAMP map are long FSet seqs, the time taken to
hash an entire seq may become problematic.  FSet avoids this problem by hashing only a bounded
number of elements; this makes collisions more likely, as some subsets of the keys may have those
elements in common, but the time complexities are unaffected nonetheless, because of this WB-tree
fallback feature.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node A Note on HAMT and Time Complexity
@subsection A Note on HAMT and Time Complexity

You will see, in documentation of HAMT-based collections such as Clojure's, claims that lookups and
point updates take ``effectively constant'' time.  You'll also see notations like ``O(log@sub{32}
@i{n})''.  To my surprise, I have sometimes seen these locutions even in peer-reviewed papers.

This is all marketing, not computer science.  They're trying to get you not to be put off by the
fact that not only are lookups and point updates on functional types slower than with traditional
mutable hash tables, but they get somewhat slower yet as the collections get large, which hash table
operations do not.  I agree with their goal --- for the vast majority of applications, the
difference is of no consequence, and you shouldn't worry about it --- but not with the way they're
trying to make the point.

For one thing, they never define ``effectively'', but sometimes they say it loudly and bang the
table a bit, hoping you'll overlook the absence of a definition: ``@strong{@emph{effectively}}
constant''.  For another, @href{A Brief Introduction to Big-O, as I have explained}, the base of the
logarithm in a Big-O expression doesn't matter, because logarithms of different bases are related by
a constant factor, and time complexity abstracts away constant factors.  So writing ``O(log@sub{32}
@i{n})'' is an abuse of the notation; it's the same as O(log @i{n}).

In my view, the way to make the point --- that the performance costs of well-implemented functional
collections are usually not worth worrying about --- is twofold.  First, we shouldn't forget that
time @emph{complexity} is not all there is to time performance: there are also constant-factor
differences, which can be quite substantial.  Fully characterizing the performance of an
implementation of an algorithm requires mentioning both.  The mistake is to try to cram both pieces
of information into the Big-O expression, which is specifically designed to isolate one of them and
ignore the other.

And second, we should point out that logarithmic time isn't actually all that different from
constant time.  A logarithmic-time operation takes only twice as long on a 10@sup{6}-element
collection as on a 10@sup{3}-element collection, and only four times as long on a 10@sup{12}-element
collection.  So yes, it does slow down a little as the collection grows, but for most use cases this
isn't a problem at all.  In particular, the gap between constant time and logarithmic time is far
smaller than that between logarithmic time and linear time.  I'm not going to gaslight you by saying
that there is ``effectively'' no difference between constant and logarithmic, but I will say that it
is only in extreme circumstances that the difference matters.

@c ================================================================================
@node Comparison and Hash Functions
@section Comparison and Hash Functions

The WB-tree collections require an ordering on their elements or keys; the CHAMP collections require
at least an equality predicate (and since they can fall back to WB-trees for collision sets, they
may need an ordering as well).

An FSet comparison function must accept two arguments A and B and return one of these four symbols:

@itemize
@item @code{:equal} if A and B are equal
@item @code{:less} if A precedes B in the desired ordering
@item @code{:greater} if A follows B in the desired ordering
@item @code{:unequal} if A and B are incomparable
@end itemize

A hash function's contract is simpler: it accepts an object and returns an integer.  (This integer
is not required to be a nonnegative fixnum; any integer is permitted.)  When a hash function is used
together with a comparison function, it must be the case that if the hash function returns distinct
values on two objects, the comparison function must not return @code{:equal} on them.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Which Elements are Compared or Hashed
@subsection Which Elements are Compared or Hashed

All elements of a set or bag are candidates for comparison or hashing, as are all keys of a map.
Range values of a map are not normally compared or hashed, but they are if the map as a whole is
compared or hashed, respectively; this is the case in which the provided @code{val-compare-fn} and
@code{val-hash-fn} come into play.

Seq elements are not normally compared or hashed, but again, they are if the seq as a whole is
compared or hashed.  In this case, if you don't want the containing collection to simply use
@code{compare} or @code{hash-value}, you must give it a compare and/or hash function that compares
the seqs in whatever way you want.

I said in the previous chapter that FSet requires that a list, string, or vector used in an FSet
collection will not subsequently be modified.  This is not quite right; objects that are @emph{not}
compared or hashed, according to the above rules, may still be mutated.  For example, you could have
a seq of vectors, or a map whose range values are vectors, and you could mutate those vectors, as
long as the seq or map is not itself compared or hashed.

@c ================================================================================
@node Generic Function @code{compare}
@section Generic Function @code{compare}
@findex compare

FSet provides a default ordering using the generic function @code{compare}.  Having a default
ordering, implemented as a generic function, is a great convenience: it makes code more elegant by
removing the need to specify, whenever you create a collection, what ordering to use for it.
Instead, the ordering is associated with the type of the objects in the collection.  While FSet now
has a facility for specifying custom comparison (and hash) functions for specific collections ---
more on which below --- I don't think you will need to use it very often.

FSet predefines @code{compare} methods on the most commonly used built-in Common Lisp types:
@code{null}, @code{real}, @code{complex}, @code{character}, @code{symbol}, @code{string},
@code{list}, @code{vector}, @code{array}, @code{sequence}, @code{class}, @code{pathname}, and
@code{package}.

FSet also defines ``cross-type'' methods that order values of different types, so that either all
values of one type will compare less than those of another, or all greater.  (The type ordering is
arbitrary.)  So FSet itself places no restrictions on what combinations of types can appear in a set
or bag, or as the keys of a map.  In particular, the value @code{nil} is allowed.

@strong{Important note}: @code{compare} compares lists, strings, vectors, and arrays by
@emph{content} even though they are mutable.  (I discussed why in @ref{Comparison and Equality}.)
This means that once you use such an object in an FSet collection in such a way that it's subject to
comparison or hashing, @strong{you must not mutate it}.  You have been warned!

In most cases, comparison of collections --- strings, vectors, arrays, and other sequence types your
implementation may support; and FSet collections themselves --- starts by comparing the sizes of the
two collections, and if they're different, considering the smaller collection as less than the
larger one, independent of their contents.  Thus, all two-character strings compare less than all
three-character strings, etc.  This approach improves performance over the more familiar
lexicographic (dictionary-style) comparison, in which length comes into play only when the shorter
string is an initial substring (prefix) of the longer one.  However, it does make the ordering less
natural for human perusal.  (Lists are compared lexicographically, though, because finding the
length of a list takes O(@i{n}) time.)

@code{compare} of course follows the FSet comparison function protocol, mentioned above.  There are
two predefined @code{compare} methods that can return @code{:unequal} on non-collection values:

@deffn Method {compare (real real)} @ a b
This method returns @code{:unequal} when the arguments are of equal value, but are not equal
according to @code{eql}.  This happens when one is a rational (including integers) and the other is
a float, or they are both floats but of different precisions --- they are numerically equal, but not
indistinguishable.
@end deffn

@deffn Method {compare (symbol symbol)} @ a b
@deffnx Method {compare (package package)} @ a b
Normally, symbols are compared by first comparing the names of their symbol-packages, and then if
those are equal, comparing their symbol-names.  However, not all symbols have a symbol-package; it's
possible to have distinct (non-@code{eq}) symbols with no symbol-package and with the same
symbol-name.  (Yes, I've seen this in macro expansions.)  In such a case, this method returns
@code{:unequal}.

There's an even gnarlier case, caused by the existence of the @code{rename-package} function in CL:
you can rename a package, perhaps to get it out of the way after it gets screwed up somehow.  If
FSet always used the @emph{current} name of the package for comparison purposes, renaming it would
be very dangerous, as it could change the orderings of symbols in existing collections, breaking a
key invariant and rendering the collections unusable.  To protect itself against this, FSet
squirrels away the original name of each package, and uses that for comparison purposes.  But this
could result in two distinct packages having the same original name.  In such a case, the packages
compare @code{:unequal}, and two symbols in those packages that have the same name also compare
@code{:unequal}.
@end deffn

Once generated, @code{:unequal} can be propagated by collection comparisons: if two collections
would be equal except that an element of one compares @code{:unequal} to the corresponding element
of the other, then the collections compare @code{:unequal} also.  More on this below.

@defun equal? a b
@code{equal?} is the FSet generalization of @code{cl:equal}.  All it does is to call @code{compare}
on its argumens, and return true if the result is @code{:equal}.  @code{equal?} behaves identically
to @code{cl:equal} on the built-in CL types, with one exception: on vectors other than bit-vectors,
@code{cl:equal} compares them by identity (@code{eq}), but @code{equal?} compares the contents.  (On
bit-vectors, both compare the contents.)
@end defun

@code{compare} makes no effort to detect circularities in the structures it is comparing.  Putting
cyclic structures in FSet collections is not supported.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Cross-Type Comparisons
@subsection Cross-Type Comparisons

As @href{Mixed-Type Collections, mentioned previously}, @code{compare} allows you to use instances
of different classes as elements of a set or bag, or keys of a map.  Instances of different classes
are compared by class @emph{first}.  There are two ways this comparison can be performed:

@itemize
@item
For supported Common Lisp built-in types and most of FSet's own types, there are methods on
@code{compare} that match each pair of types and return a predetermined value, either @code{:less}
or @code{:greater}.

@item
For other types, there is a catch-all method that compares classes by their names.
@end itemize

If you know you are going to be making a lot of mixed-type collections, and some of the types
involved are user-defined, you can use the following macro to make comparing them faster:

@defmac define-cross-type-compare-methods class-name
Generates cross-type methods on @code{compare} for the specified class, against all classes on which
this has previously been done.  FSet invokes this on the @href{Generic Function @code{compare},
supported CL types} and most of its own types.

This macro is intended to be invoked at the top level of a source file.  You should make sure that
calls to this macro are always compiled in the same order; if you don't, you could possibly get a
``master type ordering out of sync'' error, at which point you should delete all your fasls, restart
your Lisp session, and recompile.
@end defmac


@c ================================================================================
@node Generic Function @code{hash-value}
@section Generic Function @code{hash-value}
@findex hash-value

Similarly to @code{compare}, FSet has a default hash function for use by the CHAMP collections,
@code{hash-value}.  FSet predefines @code{hash-value} methods on the same built-in Common Lisp types
as for @code{compare}: @code{null}, @code{real}, @code{complex}, @code{character}, @code{symbol},
@code{string}, @code{list}, @code{vector}, @code{array}, @code{sequence}, @code{class},
@code{pathname}, and @code{package}.

The @code{hash-value} method on strings currently just calls @code{sxhash}, which in most Lisp
implementations hashes the entire string, taking time linear in its length.  I expect most
implementations have optimized this process well in a constant-factor sense, so it's unlikely to be
a problem unless your strings are huge.  But if they are, you might want to use a bounded-length
string hash (see below).

The @code{hash-value} methods on lists, vectors, and arrays do bounded hashing, as do those on the
WB collections.  Hash values on CHAMP collections are cached.

Like @code{compare}, @code{hash-value} makes no attempt to detect circularities in the structures it
is hashing.

@c ================================================================================
@node User-Defined Classes
@section User-Defined Classes

When you define your own classes and want to use them as set or bag elements or map keys, you need
to tell FSet how to compare and hash them.  FSet provides some convenience features to make this
usually very easy.  The case where you'll need to do more work is when the class is itself some kind
of collection; I'll return to this below.

For a non-collection class, there are two major cases, depending on whether you want your class to
have value semantics or reference semantics: whether it is a pure value or a mutable object.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Value Types
@subsection Value Types

In the case of a pure value, all you need to do is to tell FSet which of its slots define its value.
This is usually all of them, but in some cases you may have ``metadata'' slots that carry
information associated with the value, but are not part of that value.  FSet provides a convenient
macro for supplying this information:

@defmac define-equality-slots class @r{&rest} slots/accessors
A handy macro for specifying which slots of the class determine whether instances are equal.
Generates methods on @code{compare} and @code{hash-value}.  These methods call each of
@code{slots/accessors} on the object(s); the results are recursively compared or hashed, using
@code{compare} or @code{hash-value} respectively.  Comparison uses the slots or accessors in the
order provided.

For best performance (at least on SBCL), it is recommended to supply slot names as symbols for
standard classes --- these will turn into @code{slot-value} forms --- but accessor names as
functions for structure classes.  Arbitrary functions on the class may also be supplied.

(A deprecated feature, mentioned for completeness: if the symbol @code{:eql} is supplied as the last
accessor, then if the comparisons by the other supplied accessors all return @code{:equal} but the
arguments are not eql, the generated @code{compare} method returns @code{:unequal}.)

Examples:

@example
(defstruct point x y)
(define-equality-slots point #'x #'y)

(defclass part () ((part-number ...) ...))
(define-equality-slots part 'part-number)
@end example
@end defmac

@findex define-class
If you're using @href{Succinct Class Definitions With @code{define-class}, @code{define-class}} to
define your value type, there's another way: just include @code{:equality} in the slot options for
each equality slot.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Reference Types
@subsection Reference Types

@findex define-atomic-series
@findex increment-atomic-series
@findex defstruct
For a mutable reference type, I strongly recommend that you distinguish instances by identity rather
than by content.  If it's a structure type --- defined by @code{defstruct} --- I recommend adding an
explicit @code{id} slot and supplying that to @code{define-equality-slots}.  For convenience in
doing this, FSet exports @code{define-atomic-series} and @code{increment-atomic-series}.  Here's an
example of their use:

@example
(define-atomic-series next-frob-id)

(defstruct (frob
	     (:constructor make-frob (size color location
				      &aux (id (increment-atomic-series next-frob-id)))))
  id
  size
  color
  location)

(define-equality-slots frob #'frob-id)
@end example

Every time @code{make-frob} is called, the @code{id} of the result will be initialized to the next
integer in the series.

@tindex identity-equality-mixin
@findex defclass
If your mutable reference type is a standard class --- defined by @code{defclass} --- it's even
easier: just include @code{identity-equality-mixin} as a superclass; FSet handles the rest.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Left Preference
@subsection Left Preference

FSet has several operations that combine two collections into a third: @cref{union},
@cref{intersection}, @cref{map-union}, @cref{map-intersection}, @cref{bag-union},
@cref{bag-intersection}, @cref{bag-sum}, and @cref{bag-product}.  All of these implement @dfn{left
preference}: for any case where equal elements or map keys appear in both collections, the result
will use the one from the left operand.  This also applies to equal values associated with a given
map key.

The motivation for FSet offering this guarantee has to do with the fact that if you're using
@code{define-equality-slots} for your class, there's no requirement that you include all the slots
of the class.  But if you don't, the non-equality slots function as metadata: they're not part of
the values represented, but they get carried around with those values anyway.

Thus, if you were, for instance, unioning two sets of instances of such a class, and you had some
instances that had been decorated with metadata and some that had been newly constructed, you would
probably want the union to retain the ones with the metadata and discard the new ones, in cases
where there was overlap.  Left preference gives you a way to do that.

I must add that I don't necessarily recommend doing things this way.  It's probably cleaner to take
the equality slots, pull them out into a new class --- so that class can have the property that all
of its slots are equality slots --- and then use a separate map to relate instances of that smaller
class to the metadata you want to associate with them.  Then you won't have to worry about which
instances of the class are which; they'll be equivalent.  But FSet lets you do it either way.

@c ================================================================================
@node Custom Comparison and Hash Functions
@section Custom Comparison and Hash Functions

@cindex Organization of a collection
I firmly believe that associating comparison and hashing functions with each type, by defining
methods for that type on @code{compare} and (for CHAMP) @code{hash-value}, suffices for the vast
majority of use cases.  But there are occasional situations when it might be preferable, when
creating a collection, to supply alternative comparison and (when relevant) hashing functions for it
to use.  (I refer to the comparison and hashing functions used by a collection as the
@dfn{organization} of the collection.)

@itemize
@item 
In extremely performance-sensitive situations, when the time required for the actual comparison or
hash computation is very small, it is possible for the generic function dispatch time to become
relatively significant.  The extreme case would be a WB-set of fixnums; comparing two fixnums takes
just a few instructions.  The WB-tree collections, on a lookup, call the comparison function several
times (the number of calls is slightly more than log@sub{2} of the size of the set), so the generic
function dispatch can make a noticeable difference for them.  (In contrast, lookup on a CHAMP
collection calls the hash function once, and the comparison function at most once.)  In such cases,
you may wish to provide a custom comparison function.

@item
Sometimes you want to maintain a collection in a specific order as it gets updated.  A common
example is a dictionary of words, which you want to keep in lexicographic order instead of always
putting shorter words before longer ones, as @code{compare} does.  The WB-tree collections with a
custom comparison function will do this for you.
@end itemize

As mentioned above, complete hashing of a large object, such as a deeply nested s-expression, takes
time linear in the size of the object.  The time cost could be significant, but unless the
structures tend to differ only at the ends or leaves, there might be little benefit to hashing the
whole thing; a bounded hash that restricts the number of elements considered might work just as
well, in the sense of preventing hash collisions, yet be much cheaper to compute.

If you're defining a comparison function and hash function to use with CHAMP collections, there are
two requirements:

@itemize
@item
They must be mutually consistent: for any pair of objects on which the comparison function returns
@code{:equal} or @code{:unequal}, the hash function must return the same value on both objects.

@item
You must tell FSet to use the hash function together with the comparison function by calling
@code{define-hash-function}.  This is because the API functions and macros to create a collection
with a custom organization always take only the comparison function name; the hash function is
implicit.
@end itemize

@anchor{define-hash-function}
@defmac define-hash-function compare-fn-name hash-fn-name
Establishes that hash-based collections that are created using the named comparison function should
use the specified hashing function also.
@end defmac

Once you've written a custom comparison function, and for CHAMP, associated a custom hashing
function with it, you can supply the comparison function's name to various constructor functions and
macros; for details, see @ref{FSet API Reference}.  For sets and bags, a single comparison
function is required; for maps and binary relations, two are needed, one for keys (domain elements)
and the other for values (range elements).  In all cases, they are specified as function
@emph{names}, i.e., symbols, rather than CL function objects; this is so they can be printed out in
a reasonable way.

FSet assumes that any two objects that are @code{eql} also compare @code{:equal}.  Be sure not to
use @code{eq} to compare characters or numbers.

As mentioned above, all elements of a set or bag are candidates for comparison or hashing, as are
all keys of a map.  So you need to make sure that any custom compare or hash functions you supply
for a collection can accept all its elements or keys.

If a comparison function ever returns @code{:unequal}, then it must, as the first thing it does,
call @code{fset2:unwrap-equivalent-node} on each parameter and substitute the result for the
original value of the parameter.  For instance:

@example
(defun my-compare (a b)
  (let ((a (fset2:unwrap-equivalent-node a))
	(b (fset2:unwrap-equivalent-node b)))
    ...))
@end example

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Strict Weak Orderings
@subsection Strict Weak Orderings

Some FSet collections rely on a comparison function to order their elements.  In mathematical terms,
this function must compute a
@uref{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_ordering#Strict_weak_orderings, @dfn{strict weak
ordering}}.  FSet's provided methods on @code{compare} satisfy this requirement, and the methods
added by @code{define-equality-slots} do so also, so as long as you confine yourself to those, as I
expect most users will, you don't need to understand this section.  But if you want to write a
completely custom comparison function for use with the WB collections, you should make sure it has
the following properties:

@table @asis
@item Irreflexivity
For our purposes, this just means that the function returns @code{:equal} (not @code{:less} or
@code{:greater}) on equal arguments.
@item asymmetry
If the function returns @code{:less} on the pair 〈A, B〉, then it returns @code{:greater} on 〈B, A〉,
and conversely.
@item transitivity of inequality
If the function returns @code{:less} on 〈A, B〉, and @code{:less} on 〈B, C〉, then it also returns
@code{:less} on 〈A, C〉; and similarly for @code{:greater}.
@item commutativity of equality
If the function returns @code{:equal} on 〈A, B〉, then it also returns @code{:equal} on 〈B, A〉.
@item transitivity of equality
If the function returns @code{:equal} on 〈A, B〉, and @code{:equal} on 〈B, C〉, then it also
returns @code{:equal} on 〈A, C〉.
@item commutativity of incomparability
If the function returns @code{:unequal} on 〈A, B〉, then it also returns @code{:unequal} on 〈B, A〉.
@item transitivity of incomparability
If the function returns @code{:unequal} on 〈A, B〉, and either @code{:equal} or @code{:unequal} on
〈B, C〉, then it returns @code{:unequal} on 〈A, C〉.
@end table

Satisfying these requirements is fairly straightforward if you follow this plan.  Assuming that the
values you're comparing are represented by objects of the same class, you compare their slot values
in some order you choose.  For each comparison, if the result is @code{:less} or @code{:greater},
return that; if it's @code{:equal} or @code{:unequal}, proceed to the next slot if there is one.
Once you've compared all the slots, if any slot value comparison returned @code{:unequal}, return
@code{:unequal}; otherwise, return @code{:equal}.

In many cases you will be able to know that no individual slot value comparison can return
@code{:unequal} --- for example, if you're comparing integers or strings --- so you won't need to
handle that case.

FSet exports a macro, @code{compare-slots}, that will do the above comparison for you in the case
where there's a fixed list of slots to compare.  If that's not the case --- for example, if you've
got a non-FSet collection class that you would like to nest inside FSet collections --- you'll have
to code the comparison yourself; see @href{Non-FSet Collections, the next section}.

@defmac compare-slots obj1 obj2 @r{&rest} accessors...
A handy macro for writing the bodies of @code{compare} methods and comparison functions for user
classes.  Returns the result of comparing the two objects by comparing the results of calling each
of @code{accessors}, in order, on the objects.  Despite the name, an accessor can actually be any
function on the class in question; it can also be a symbol, which will be used to access the slot
via @code{slot-value}.  For example, if class @code{frob} has accessor @code{frob-color} and slot
@code{id}:

@example
(defmethod compare ((f1 frob) (f2 frob))
  (compare-slots f1 f2 #'frob-color 'id))
@end example

At least on SBCL, it will be fastest to use slot names (e.g. @code{'id}) on standard classes, but
accessor functions (e.g. @code{#'frob-color}) on structure classes.  If you're writing a function
instead of a method, declaring the type of the parameters can also help.

By default, the values of a given accessor on the two objects will be compared with @code{compare}.
To override this, you have two choices depending on whether the function you want to call obeys the
FSet comparison protocol (returning @code{:equal}, @code{:less}, @code{:greater}, or
@code{:unequal}) or is just a boolean predicate \(like @code{cl:<}\).  In the first case, supply the
accessor as a list @code{(:compare-fn @i{acc} @i{compare-fn})} where @code{@i{acc}} is the accessor
and @code{@i{compare-fn}} is the name of the function to use; in the second case, use
@code{:less-fn} instead of @code{:compare-fn}.  For example:

@example
(defmethod compare ((f1 frob) (f2 frob))
  (compare-slots f1 f2 (:compare-fn #'frob-color #'compare-colors)
                         (:less-fn 'id #'<)))
@end example

If the symbol @code{:eql} is supplied as the last accessor, then if the comparisons
by the other supplied accessors all return @code{:equal} but @code{obj1} and @code{obj2} are
not eql, this returns @code{:unequal}.
@end defmac

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Non-FSet Collections
@subsection Non-FSet Collections

If you are using a collection class that is neither built in to Common Lisp nor part of FSet, and
you want to use instances of the class in such a way that FSet will need to compare or hash them
(@pxref{Which Elements are Compared or Hashed}), you have a bit more work to do.

First, you need to decide whether to treat them as @href{Value Types, value types} or
@href{Reference Types, reference types}.  If they are mutable, I recommend treating them as
reference types if (a) you can find a way to do that and (b) doing so makes sense, given the way you
want to use them; but it's possible that you'll want to treat them the same way @href{Comparison and
Equality, FSet treats CL lists and vectors}: by assuming that they won't be mutated once they're
placed in an FSet collection, so that you can compare and hash them by content.  If you make that
assumption, don't forget to stick to it!

You have another choice as well: whether to implement the comparison and hashing by adding methods
to @code{compare} and @code{hash-value}, or by defining custom comparison and hash functions to be
used with the collections that @emph{contain} instances of this class.  I recommend the former, as
it's more convenient and the generic function dispatch overhead is unlikely to be significant, but
it's up to you.

Either way, you'll need to understand @href{Strict Weak Orderings, the previous section}.  For
examples, see the @code{compare} methods in the FSet source tree, file @code{Code/order.lisp}.

There are two further choices to be made about the hash function: whether to do bounded hashing, and
whether to cache the result.  For collections that can get large, I recommend doing at least one of
them.  Bounded hashing keeps the hashing time from getting out of hand; as mentioned above, FSet can
live with the risk of a higher hash collision rate because it falls back to using WB-trees for the
collision sets.  Caching takes a different approach; the initial hash computation can be expensive,
but it only needs to be done once per collection instance.  Which of these is better for a given
collection class will depend on the details of how the class is to be used.

@c ================================================================================
@node Choosing a Data Structure
@section Choosing a Data Structure

This discussion applies to the ``setlike'' types: sets, maps, and bags --- the ones for which FSet
gives you a choice between WB or CHAMP.

For most applications, CHAMP performs better, which is why I've made it the default in FSet 2.
However, there are still reasons to use the WB implementations in some cases:

@table @asis
@item Controlling the ordering
You might want to maintain a collection in a particular order --- for example, as mentioned above,
you might want to keep a map whose keys are strings in lexicographic order.  This might be just for
convenience while viewing the collection in the debugger or printing it out, or maybe you
specifically want to iterate over it in that order.

@item Using order-related operations
Closely related to the above is the fact that the WB collections support some operations that depend
on the ordering, operations CHAMP doesn't support.  These include @code{least}, @code{greatest},
@code{rank}, @code{at-rank}, @code{split-from}, @code{split-above}, @code{split-through}, and
@code{split-below}.

@item Better locality
For extremely large collections, it is possible that the WB collections could give better
performance, in a situation where the elements or keys being added or looked up tend to cluster so
that those referenced closely together in time also tend to be close together in the ordering.  For
instance, if you have a map indexed by long strings, and operations on the map often come in groups
whose keys share a common prefix, there is a possibility that it would be better as a WB-map.  This
is because ordered trees tend to group items together in memory that are close together in the
ordering; this is especially true if the Lisp implementation uses a compacting garbage collector.  A
CHAMP map is likely to scatter such keys across the memory used by the map, resulting in more cache
misses and TLB faults.  If you think you might be in a situation where this effect could matter, I
recommend making some timing measurements.
@end table

These FSet functions are sometimes useful for compare-functions for WB-collections:

@deffn {Generic Function} compare-lexicographically a b @r{&key}
@deffnx Method {compare-lexicographically (string string)} @ @r{&key}
@deffnx Method {compare-lexicographically (list list)} @r{&key} @ @r{(@var{val-compare-fn} #'compare)}
@deffnx Method {compare-lexicographically (vector vector)} @ @r{&key} @r{(@var{val-compare-fn} #'compare)}
@deffnx Method {compare-lexicographically (seq seq)} @ @r{&key} @r{(@var{val-compare-fn} #'compare)}
A generic function with methods to compare strings, lists, or vectors lexicographically.  In the
case of lists and vectors, you can optionally supply a function to compare the individual values
(elements) with.
@end deffn

@defun compare-strings-lexicographically a b
@defunx compare-lists-lexicographically a b @r{&optional} @r{(@var{val-compare-fn} #'compare)}
@defunx compare-vectors-lexicographically a b @r{&optional} @r{(@var{val-compare-fn} #'compare)}
@defunx compare-seqs-lexicographically a b @r{&optional} @r{(@var{val-compare-fn} #'compare)}
Non-generic functions to compare strings. lists. or vectors lexicographically.  Use when you know
the type and you want to avoid the generic function dispatch overhead (which is, however, only
rarely noticeable).  In the case of lists and vectors, you can optionally supply a function to
compare the individual values (elements) with.
@end defun


@c ================================================================================
@node Transients
@section Transients

I've shamelessly copied the idea of transients from Rich Hickey's Clojure.  The basic idea is that when we're
originally populating a collection, we don't need the updates to be implemented functionally,
because we know we're holding the only reference to the collection; the updates can be performed by
mutation much of the time, as long as it's done in such a way that the resulting tree still has the
correct structure.  Once it's fully populated, we convert it back to a persistent collection (the
usual kind in FSet), and then we can pass it around without worrying about it being further mutated
underneath us.

Transients are available only for the CHAMP collections: @code{ch-set}, @code{ch-map},
@code{ch-bag}, @code{ch-2-relation}, @code{ch-replay-set}, and @code{ch-replay-map}.  Transients
have a very narrow API, with only a few operations supported: adding a single element or pair,
removing a single element or map key, retrieving a single element, testing membership, and the like.
Iterating over a transient is unsupported or at least discouraged (more on this below).  Operations
that combine two collections, such as @code{union}, are definitely not supported.  You see that
transients are useful primarily for the specific scenario of populating a new collection, and little
else --- but of course, populating a new collection is very common.

Transients are mutable objects.  Instead of the usual FSet functional update operations ---
@code{with}, @code{less}, etc. --- you update them using operations such as @code{include!},
@code{exclude!}, and @code{(setf lookup!)}.  @code{include!} and @code{exclude!} correspond to
@code{with} and @code{less}, or perhaps more clearly, to @code{includef} and @code{excludef}, which
expand to @code{with} and @code{less} respectively.  Be sure you understand the semantic
differences:

@example
FSET2> (defparameter *psa* (set))
*PSA*
FSET2> (defparameter *psb* *psa*)
*PSB*
FSET2> (includef *psa* 'foo)
##@{ FOO @}
FSET2> *psb*
##@{ @}                                              ; still empty
FSET2> (defparameter *tsa* (make-transient *psa*))
*TSA*
FSET2> (defparameter *tsb* *tsa*)
*TSB*
FSET2> (include! *tsa* 'bar)
#<TRANSIENT-CH-SET 334>                            ; transients don't print their contents
FSET2> (contains? *tsb* 'bar)
T
BAR
FSET2> *psa*
##@{ FOO @}                                          ; original persistent is unchanged
@end example

Since transients are mutable objects, they are therefore distinguished by identity, following FSet
recommended practice.  A transient is only ever @code{equal?} to itself, independent of its contents.
Transients are assigned a unique serial number when created, which is used for printing, as in the
example above.

When accessing a transient map, you can use @code{lookup} or @code{@@} as usual, but to add or update
a key/value pair, you must use @code{setf} with @code{lookup!}, or else 3-argument @code{include!}:

@example
FSET2> (defparameter *tm* (make-transient (map)))
*TM*
FSET2> (setf (lookup! *tm* 'foo) 3)
3
FSET2> (@@ *tm* 'foo)
3
T
FOO
FSET2> (lookup! *tm* 'foo)
3
T
FOO
FSET2> (include! *tm* 'bar 7)
#<TRANSIENT-CH-MAP 335>
FSET2> (@@ *tm* 'bar)
7
T
BAR
@end example

As you see, you can use @code{lookup!} for accessing, too, if you find it more consistent, but
that's a little odd since the transient map won't be modified in that case.  It's your choice.

If you forget and try to use @code{with}, @code{less}, @code{includef}, @code{excludef}, @code{(setf
(@@ ...) ...)} or @code{(setf (lookup ...) ...)} with a transient, you will get a runtime error.

You might have noticed, in the above examples, that to create a transient collection, you must first
create a persistent one.  This is partly to make it easy to tell FSet what type of transient to
create, but it's also because the persistent collection doesn't actually have to be empty; if it
isn't, the transient will be initialized with its contents.

This doesn't, however, mean that you can make any persistent update go faster by making a transient
from the persistent, applying a single update, and making it back into a persistent; that would
actually be a little slower than doing a normal functional update.  The performance benefits of
transients accrue when nodes in the internal tree are updated multiple times via a single transient.
So you won't see much benefit from making an already-populated persistent into a transient unless
the number of updates you do to the transient before converting it back is at least a good fraction,
like maybe half, of its initial size.  There's one exception to this, though: If you repeatedly
modify the value for a given map key, or the multiplicity of a bag element, you will see significant
performance gains using a transient.

The function @code{make-persistent}, that extracts a persistent collection from a transient one, has
two modes, controlled by its @code{copy?} keyword parameter.  If @code{copy?} is false --- the
default case --- then @code{make-persistent} runs in O(1) time; @emph{but} it resets the transient,
so that if you continue to update it afterwards, it is as if the transient was just created: you'll
lose the performance benefit.

However, if @code{copy?} is true, then @code{make-persistent} copies out the contents of the
transient, instead of reusing its internal tree, and leaves it unchanged; this takes O(n) time
(though it's a pretty fast O(n)), but you can then continue to update the transient, and it will be
just as fast as it was.  Copying also does compaction, squeezing out the extra space allocated in
the transient nodes to allow for updates.  So, in the common case in which you're discarding the
transient after calling @code{make-persistent} on it, let @code{copy?} default to false ---
@emph{unless} you've just created a very large collection that you expect to keep in memory for a
long time, such that the compaction might be desirable; in that case, consider passing true for
@code{copy?}.

If you want to iterate over the current state of a transient collection, in most cases you will need
to just make a persistent from it and iterate over that, in any of the several ways FSet gives you
to iterate.  As just mentioned, @code{(make-persistent ... :copy? t)} does that without disturbing
the transient, and the fact that it takes O(n) time is likely of little consequence if you're about
to perform another O(n) operation on the collection anyway by iterating over the whole thing.  But
for the replay collections, @code{transient-ch-replay-set} and @code{transient-ch-replay-map}, you
don't need to make a copy, as these have an @code{at-index} operation to retrieve an element or pair
by its index; this can be used with @code{dotimes} or the like to iterate over the collection.
However, there's a tradeoff; this is an O(log @i{n}) operation.  (The reason the replay collections
have this operation when the others don't is that their ordering is well-defined, being the order in
which elements or keys were first added.)

By default, transients are unsynchronized and are @emph{not thread-safe}.  However,
@code{make-transient} has keyword parameter @code{synchronized?}, which if true, adds locking to
serialize all operations on the transient.


@c ================================================================================
@node Dynamic Tuples
@section Dynamic Tuples

@c &&& write me
