@ignore

© 2026 Scott L. Burson

This document is published under the Creative Commons
@uref{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/, CC BY-NC-SA 4.0} license.  This license
enables reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format for
noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator.  If you remix,
adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms.
@end ignore

@node The Design of FSet
@chapter The Design of FSet

The purpose of this chapter is to explain the major design decisions that went into FSet.  It's
probably of greatest interest to experienced Common Lisp programmers who want to use the library,
and to other language/library designers.

My design desiderata for FSet were, in roughly decreasing order of importance:

@itemize
@item
Elegant set-theoretic semantics

@item
Good integration with Common Lisp

@item
An API that is general, easy to use, and reasonably complete

@item
Good time performance, in both a time-complexity sense and a constant-factor sense

@item
Space overhead is reasonably small
@end itemize

Don't be daunted by the term ``set-theoretic''.  All I mean by it is that FSet collections are
nestable: you can have sets of sets, maps keyed by seqs (FSet's sequences) or even sets of seqs,
@i{etc. etc.}, with no additional effort on your part.  While such types aren't often needed in
application programming, they do show up sometimes in compiler work.

The latter two properties drove the choice of data structures; see @ref{FSet Data Structures}.  The
first three more concern the API.  In particular, the first two are somewhat in conflict, as I'll
now explain.

@c I feel this needs more intro/overview material before just diving into the divergences.

@c Map defaults should be mentioned here somewhere; they also support DRY.

@hrule{}


@c ================================================================================
@node Divergences from Common Lisp
@section Divergences from Common Lisp
There are two major ways in which FSet's collections differ from the ones built into CL.

@c Rewrite in light of earlier discussion
The first, of course, is the functional semantics.  This isn't a total departure, because lists are
frequently used functionally.  But, of course, cons cells sometimes are used as mutable objects;
arrays are usually used as mutable objects; the CL sequence functions, that abstract over lists and
vectors, expect mutability; and hash tables are mutable objects.

In @ref{What Is a Functional Datatype?}, I explained what a functional datatype is, and pointed out
that they can provide operations that can be conceptualized either as computing a new value for a
collection and reassigning it to the variable holding it, or as a mutation to an unaliasable value.

This means that FSet's update operations have to work differently from most CL builtins.  The
clearest example has to do with the behavior of @code{setf}.  (I'll say more about @code{setf}
@href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, below}; non-CL-programmers might want to read that first.)  If you
have a CL vector @code{v}, you can set one of its elements using @code{setf} of @code{elt}:

@example
(setf (elt v i) x)
@end example

If, instead, you have an FSet seq @code{s}, you can write an expression that looks superficially similar:

@example
(setf (lookup s i) x)
@end example

However, it means something quite different.  In the @code{elt} case, if there are other variables
directly or indirectly bound to @code{v}, they will also see the change: a mutable shared object has been
modified.  The @code{lookup} case, however, is equivalent to

@example
  (setq s (with s i x))
@end example

where the FSet @code{with} operation returns an updated seq that now has @code{x} at index @code{i}.
The change will not be visible anywhere except through variable @code{s}.

I have occasionally heard people complain that this is against the spirit of the language, but it
really isn't.  Consider this example:

@example
  (let* ((a nil)
         (b a))
    (push 'foo a)
    b)
@end example

Every CL programmer knows, without even thinking about it, that the above evaluates to @code{nil}: the
modification performed by @code{push} is visible only through @code{a}, not through @code{b}.  Lists are usually
used functionally, and this, notwithstanding the @code{setq} implied by the @code{push}, is an example; there
is no potentially shared list object being modified here.

"But," some might say, "that's @code{push}, not @code{setf}." All right, here's another example:

@example
  (let* ((a 1)
         (b a))
    (setf (ldb (byte 2 1) a) 3)   ; a becomes 7
    b)
@end example

Here there's a @code{setf} of an expression wrapping @code{a}, but its effect is still just to assign a new
value to @code{a}; @code{b} is still 1.  Again, every CL programmer knows this without thinking about it;
integers are not aliasing, mutable objects.

So no matter how long you've been writing Common Lisp, learning FSet is not going to break your
brain.

The second major way in which FSet's design diverges somewhat from CL's has to do with semantic
loading.  Lisp lists are semantically @emph{unloaded}.  A list can be used as a sequence; as a set,
where order is unimportant and duplicates are not allowed; as a bag, where order is unimportant and
duplicates @emph{are} allowed; as a map, in either alist or plist form; or in many other ways.  So,
as a programmer writing code to do something with a list, you have to remember the intended
semantics of this particular list.  Also, you have to remember what equivalence relation you
intended to compare elements with.  Sometimes, the default of @code{eql} suffices, but often, you
want to compare elements by their contents rather than their identity; in such cases, you have to
pass in the equivalence relation every time you call @code{member}, @code{assoc}, @code{find},
@i{etc.}  But doing so violates the well-known ``DRY principle'' (Don't Repeat Yourself).

In contrast, FSet collections are semantically @emph{loaded}: they carry their semantics, including the
applicable equivalence relation, along with them, so you don't have to supply it at every call.  (CL
hash tables are like this too, so again, it's not a complete departure.)

This semantic loading makes code that uses FSet more elegant, and practically eliminates bugs that
can occur when a list is not used consistently across the program.  But it did cause one design
quandary.  I wanted to provide shadowed versions of Lisp builtins like @code{find}, @code{position},
@code{count}, @i{etc.} that would work on FSet collections but would bounce to the CL builtins if
passed a list.  The catch was, FSet has its own default notion of equality; defaulting to @code{eql}
didn't make sense.

I finally settled on this approach: While generic versions of a number of operations will be
provided, it is critical for the user to understand that the purpose of this genericity is
@strong{@emph{not}} so that you can write code that will actually be called on both Lisp sequences
and the FSet types.  Rather, the goal is more modest: to make familiar functionality accessible by
familiar names, so that you can write FSet code without having to learn new names for @code{find}
@i{etc.}

One issue with this approach has to do with the Lisp names @code{first}, @code{rest}, @code{last},
and @code{second} through @code{seventh}.  First, let's note the inconsistencies already in CL:

@itemize
@item
These are not generic sequence operations, but work only on lists.

@item
@code{last} doesn't return the last element of a list, but rather the last @emph{cons} in the list.

@end itemize

For FSet @dfn{seqs} --- as the sequence type is called, to distinguish it from CL sequences --- I
felt it was important to treat @code{first} and @code{last} symmetrically, since the implementation
is symmetric.  Also, there is a whole structure of related operations operating on the ends of seqs;
I have called these @code{with-first}, @code{with-last}, @code{less-first}, @code{less-last},
@code{push-first}, @code{push-last}, @code{pop-first}, and @code{pop-last}, the first four being the
functional update operations, and the last four being the modify macros that invoke the first four,
respectively.  Because of the importance of these operations, I felt it would be acceptable to force
some compromises on existing code.  So FSet exports a generic function @code{first} which includes a
compatibility method for lists; here the impact on existing code is limited to the cost of the CLOS
dispatch.  For @code{last}, however, I decided to make an @strong{incompatible} change:
@code{fset2:last}, on a list, returns the last element rather than the last cons.  FSet also exports
the functionality of @code{cl:last} as @code{lastcons} --- clearly a better name.

FSet does not, however, export any version of @code{rest}, or of @code{second} through
@code{seventh}.  For @code{rest}, I think @code{less-first} is better because it participates in the
symmetric structure shown above.

@anchor{@code{head} and @code{tail}}
(From the perspective of FSet, with its symmetric functional sequences, it strikes me as a little
unfortunate that the names that caught on as modern replacements for @code{car} and @code{cdr} were
@code{first} and @code{rest} instead of, say, @code{head} and @code{tail}.  @code{first} and
@code{rest}, it seems to me, are naturally applied to any sequence, where @code{head} and
@code{tail} more specifically suggest the structure of a list.  So FSet exports @code{head} and
@code{tail} as synonyms for @code{car} and @code{cdr}.)

Another issue: I mentioned above that generic-function versions of @code{find-if} @i{etc.} are
provided.  They are, but they are not completely compatible when invoked on FSet types (they
@emph{are} completely compatible when invoked on Lisp sequences).  The primary differences are:

@itemize
@item
The default for @code{:test} is @code{#'fset:equal?} rather than @code{#'eql}.  Yes, it's a little weird to key
this off of the collection class.  But remember, our purpose is not true genericity, but merely
mental convenience.  In that light, if you're invoking one of these on an FSet collection, it's
fair to conclude that you're working within an FSet context, and FSet semantics should apply.

@item
The @code{:test-not} keyword is not supported (it's deprecated in the ANSI spec).
@end itemize


@c ================================================================================
@node Comparison and Equality
@section Comparison and Equality

FSet has a default ordering relation, computed by the generic function @code{compare}.  It comes
with methods to compare most of the builtin CL types (@code{null}, @code{real}, @code{complex},
@code{character}, @code{symbol}, @code{string}, @code{vector}, @code{list}, @code{package},
@code{pathname}, and @code{array}) along with FSet's own types.  The comparisons are used to build
and search FSet's internal data structures, so they must obey @href{Strict Weak Orderings, certain
mathematical rules}.

The semantics of @code{equal?}, which are a consequence of the behavior of @code{compare}, are, on
the built-in CL types, almost identical to those of @code{cl:equal}.  The only difference is that
for vectors that are not bit-vectors, @code{cl:equal} compares them by identity (@code{eq}), while
@code{equal?} compares them by content.  (Both functions compare bit-vectors by content.)

FSet collections are always compared by content, and it is intended that objects that are actually
subject to mutation should be compared by identity.

For more in-depth discussion on comparison by identity vs. comparison by content, have a look at
Henry Baker's paper @uref{https://plover.com/~mjd/misc/hbaker-archive/ObjectIdentity.html,Equal
Rights for Functional Objects}.  This blog post may also be of interest:
@uref{https://scottlburson2.blogspot.com/2024/09/equality-and-comparison-in-fset.html,Equality and
Comparison in FSet}.

There is a big catch here, however.  Lisp lists, strings, and vectors are technically mutable, and
not infrequently actually mutated.  However, defining @code{compare} to distinguish them by identity
would run into two problems.  First, it would produce very surprising results semantically; given a
map keyed by strings, for example, one would have to pass the correct instance of each key string to
@code{lookup} in order to retrieve the value.  These types would function simply as opaque identities.
This would not be useful behavior.  Second, the implementation would have very poor performance
characteristics, as there would be no way to order instances of these types; @code{compare} would have to
fall back to returning @code{:unequal} on any pair of them, forcing the implementation to store them in
alists and compare them by @code{eql}.  Time complexity of @code{lookup} would balloon from logarithmic to
linear.

So FSet makes an assumption that is not unreasonable in practice, but that you @emph{must} keep in
mind: once a list, string, or vector is placed in an FSet collection, FSet assumes it will not
thereafter be mutated.  This assumption licenses FSet to compare these by content instead of by
identity, giving natural semantics and decent performance.  (There is an exception, @href{Which
Elements are Compared or Hashed, discussed later}.)

FSet does not attempt to define @code{compare} on Lisp hash tables or function objects.  I do not
recommend placing these types in FSet collections.

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Abstract and Concrete Equality
@subsection Abstract and Concrete Equality

A collection type considered abstractly can have multiple concrete implementations.  This is true
even in bare Common Lisp: a sequence can be implemented as either a list or a vector.  FSet adds a
third sequence type, plus two implementations each of sets, maps, bags, and others.  The question
then arises: how does equality testing of collections deal with this?  Can two sequences, for
example, of different implementations be equal?

Some languages, including notably Java, followed by the JVM languages Scala and Clojure, take an
abstract view of equality: two sequences are equal if they contain the same elements in the same
order, independent of what subtype of @code{List} each one is implemented as.  Similarly, two sets
are equal if they are of the same size and each element of one is also an element of the other.  And
so on.

The alternative is a concrete view of equality: for two objects to be equal, they must first be of
the same class.  This is how CL's @code{equal} works: a list and a vector are automatically unequal;
their contents are not considered.

The attractiveness of the abstract definition is obvious.  For FSet, however, it would run into a
snag.  One of FSet's design desiderata is that collections must be nestable without additional work.
Since some of FSet's collections --- the WB-tree sets, maps, @i{etc.} --- are implemented as ordered
binary trees, that means that there must exist a consistent ordering over all FSet types.  Consider
two sets with the same internal ordering relation: FSet can order the sets first by size and then
lexicographically, as if they were sequences.

But FSet also has hash-based implementations, which necessarily keep their elements in a different
order (and even within an implementation, you can @href{Custom Comparison and Hash Functions,
customize} the ordering).  What would happen, for instance, if we had a WB-tree set, whose elements
included both WB-tree sets and hash-based sets?  Using abstract equality, we would have to consider
two sets equal if they have the same elements.  But for our ordering relation to be transitive, it
would have to order sets with different internal orders identically.  The only way to do that would
be to convert them to a canonical internal order before comparing them, which would be very
expensive --- too expensive to consider.

So FSet must use concrete equality, like @code{cl:equal}.  This means that a list and a vector, or a
list and an FSet seq, or a seq and a vector, are never equal according to @code{equal?}, even if
they have the same elements in the same order.  Similarly, two FSet collections of the same abstract
type but different implementations, such as @code{ch-set} and @code{wb-set}, are never considered
equal, even if they have the same contents.  In fact, even two @code{wb-set}s with different
ordering relations, or two @code{ch-set}s with different hash functions, cannot be equal.

Either choice, arguably, carries a potential for confusion.  Consider: what should happen if you try
to make a set that contains both the list @code{(a b c)} and the vector @code{#(a b c)}?  If FSet
used abstract equality, the set would wind up containing only one of those (the first one added,
presumably, though it might not always be clear which one that is).  I can certainly imagine that
behavior being surprising to someone intentionally using lists and vectors to represent different
kinds of things.  With concrete equality, the set would contain both of them; but this behavior
would also be surprising to someone thinking of these as abstract sequences that just happen to be
represented differently.

I don't think there's a perfect solution here.  Concrete equality was the path of least resistance
for FSet, so that's the way I've gone.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------



@c ================================================================================
@node Seqs and Strings
@section Seqs and Strings
Along with using heterogeneous trees to save space, the seq implementation tries to save even more
space by using strings, when possible, for the short leaf vectors.  This is possible when the
contiguous sequence of up to 8 consecutive elements of the seq that happen to wind up in a
particular leaf vector are all characters.  In Lisp implementations where @code{base-char} is
distinct from @code{character}, FSet will even use @code{base-string}s when possible.  The upshot
is:

@itemize
@item
You can use seqs to hold character strings without worrying about space consumption.

@item
A seq can hold character strings interspersed with occasional non-characters quite efficiently;
each non-character will force only one leaf vector to be a non-string.  (Similarly, a seq can
hold strings of @code{base-char}s interspersed with the occasional @code{extended-char} quite
efficiently.)

@end itemize

Since seqs have log-time concatenation and subsequence operations, they can actually be very useful
for string manipulation.


@c ================================================================================
@node The @code{@@} Macro
@section The @code{@@} Macro

@c &&& Rather think I should also have a defmac for this in the API reference, to which at least
@c some of the current refs should point (though it should in turn point here).

Common Lisp is a "Lisp-2", meaning a two-namespace Lisp in which a given name can have both a
function binding and a value binding.  In a Lisp-1, like Scheme, it would be nice to set the FSet
types up as objects that could be called as functions as well as having the various operations
invoked on them (some object systems for other Lisps have supported this, such as that of
@uref{http://mumble.net/~jar/tproject/,T}).  Then, instead of @code{(lookup m x)} where @code{m} is
a map, you could write simply @code{(m x)}.  But this doesn't work in a Lisp-2, since the @code{car}
of a form is evaluated in the function namespace; you'd have to write @code{(funcall m x)}, which
isn't any more elegant.

What I can do, however, is give you a shorter name to type than @code{funcall}.  Thus is born
@code{@@}.  It is a macro that expands to code that tests whether its first argument is a Lisp
function; if so, it funcalls it (with the supplied arguments); otherwise it calls @code{lookup} on
it.  So you can use it when writing higher-order code to make it accept a map as well as a unary
Lisp function.  (Also, a seq behaves as a map from index to element, and a set behaves as a map from
value to boolean, and a bag behaves as a map from value to multiplicity.)

Whether you want to use @code{@@} generally, in place of @code{lookup}, is a matter of taste.  Both
are @code{setf}-able; though doing @code{(setf (@@ m x) y)} works only if @code{m} is an FSet
collection.  Remember, this doesn't modify the collection; it's equivalent to @code{(setf m (with m
x y))}.

@cindex Emacs
If you use Emacs for editing, you might find that it doesn't treat @code{@@} as a symbol, which can
occasionally be annoying.  Adding this line to your init file (@code{~/.emacs} or
@code{~/.emacs.d/init.el}) should cure the problem:

@example
(modify-syntax-entry ?@ "_" lisp-mode-syntax-table)
@end example


@c ================================================================================
@node Quasi-Mutating Operators
@section Quasi-Mutating Operators

@href{What Is a Functional Datatype?, As mentioned}, even though FSet's collections are functional,
it nonetheless provides several operations that @emph{appear} at first glance to be mutating.  As I
explained in that section, you can, if you like, employ the mental model that FSet's collections are
mutable, but that binding and assignment do not cause aliasing.  This isn't actually how the FSet
implementation works, but the semantics would be equivalent if it did.

Common Lisp provides a general, extensible macro, @code{setf}, which takes an expression called a
``place'' (in C/C++, the term would be ``lvalue expression'') and a second expression which is
evaluated normally, and updates the place so it holds the value.  Exactly what this means depends on
the place expression.

There are, for our  purposes, two kinds of place expressions: those that are directly assignable, and
those that use what I'll call a ``functional accessor''.  Directly assignable places include
variables (the most common example), as well as invocations of built-in accessors such as @code{car}
or @code{aref}, slot accessors on user-defined classes, and function calls for which a @code{setf}
function is also defined.  For such cases, CL has, or has been given, a procedure that writes a
value into the location, however it is represented.

Functional accessors, in contrast, take another place as an argument; a @code{setf} of a functional
accessor expression then updates the inner place so that its value contains the value being stored.
That is, the functional accessor specifies a computation, on the existing value of the inner place
and the value being stored, to produce a new value of the inner place.

CL has three @uref{https://www.lispworks.com/documentation/HyperSpec/Body/05_abb.htm, predefined
functional accessors}: @code{ldb}, @code{mask-field}, and @code{getf}.  For example, @code{ldb} as a
function extracts a byte from an integer; when used as a @code{setf} place, it arranges for a value
to be stored back into such a byte.  So, @code{(setf (ldb (byte 6 4) w) 42)} is equivalent to
@code{(setq w (dpb 42 (byte 6 4) w))}; that is, it updates @code{w} so that its byte of width 6 at
position 4 contains 42.  (Nowadays most people would say ``bitfield'', but Lisp harks back to a time
when ``byte'' did not necessarily imply 8 bits.)

FSet defines two functional accessors, @code{lookup} and @href{The @code{@@} Macro, @code{@@}}.
They take the first argument as the inner place expression, and effectively expand to a @code{setf}
of that place:

@example
(setf (lookup place key) value)  ; or (setf (@@ place key) value)
@end example
is equivalent to
@example
(setf place (with place key value))
@end example

(Three-argument @code{with} performs a functional update on a map or seq, adding a map pair or
replacing the previous value, or changing the value of a seq at an index.  I'm skipping over some
details here having to do with avoiding repeated evaluation of subexpressions.)

Functional accessor expressions can be nested.  Sometimes people use ``chained maps'', where the
range values of an outer map are inner maps.  An FSet expression like

@example
(setf (@@ (@@ m k1) k2) value)
@end example
will have the effect of storing @code{value} under key @code{k2} of the inner map that's under key
@code{k1} of the outer map.  Again, it will do this by constructing a new inner map and then a new
outer map, and assigning the latter back to @code{m}.

Thus, @code{setf} expansion descends recursively through functional accessors in the place
expression until it reaches a directly assignable inner place.  Usually, that's a variable
reference, but it could also reference an array element or a slot of an object.

CL also has a concept called a ``modify macro'', that abstracts expressions of the form:
@example
(setf place (@i{operation} place args...))
@end example

Examples of predefined modify macros in CL are @code{incf} and @code{push}.  FSet defines several of
these.  An example is @code{includef}:

@example
(includef s x)
@end example
is equivalent to
@example
(setf s (with s x))
@end example

(Two-argument @code{with} adds an element to a set or bag.)


@c &&& @code{subseq} collision


@c ================================================================================
@node Map and Seq Defaults
@section Map and Seq Defaults

FSet maps and seqs both allow you to specify the value that will be returned by a @code{lookup} when
the key or index is outside the domain of the collection.  This is a handy feature that
significantly improves the elegance of certain kinds of code: you specify the default once, when
creating the collection, rather than every place you access it.  Contrast a Lisp alist, where every
access would look like @code{(or (cdr (assoc @i{x} @i{alist})) @i{default})}, or even a CL
hashtable, where you'd have to supply the default as the third argument to every call to
@code{gethash}.

For convenience, and consistency with CL, the default default --- the value used as a default if you
don't specify one --- is good old @code{nil}.  In a few cases, however, such as @code{compose} of a
map with a function, the presence of any default is annoying, because the function being composed
with has to accept the default value and produce a default for the result map.  So FSet also allows
maps and seqs to have @emph{no} default.  When this option is used, @code{lookup} on the collection,
given a key or index outside its domain, will signal an error.  You can use this as a convenient
defensive programming mechanism in cases where you don't expect out-of-domain lookups.

When a map or seq is printed that has a default other than @code{nil}, the default is printed at the
end, separated by a slash; when it has no default, the string @code{/[no default]} is appended.

Map defaults are handy when you're using chained maps, as discussed in the previous section, since
they let you arrange for the inner maps to be created automatically as needed.  This is done by
giving the outer map a default which is the empty map.  Then you can use the @code{setf} expression
shown in the previous section without further ado:

@example
(let ((m (empty-map :default (empty-map))))
  @dots{}
  (setf (@@ (@@ m k1) k2) value)
  @dots{})
@end example

If you were doing something like this with CL hash tables, you would have to explicitly check,
before doing the @code{setf}, that the outer map had an entry for @code{k1}, and if not, initialize
it to the empty map; roughly:

@example
(@href{Macro mvlet, mvlet} ((inner found? (gethash k1 m)))
  (unless found?
    (setf inner (make-hash-table))
    (setf (gethash k1 m) inner))
  (setf (gethash k2 inner) value))
@end example

With FSet, the default on the outer map makes the explicit check unnecessary; the empty map is used
automatically if @code{m} has no entry yet for @code{k1}.
