@node Examples
@chapter Examples

[NOTE: I am hoping to expand this chapter considerably in the future.  But this is a start.]

In these examples, you can spot references to FSet macros and functions, because I have linked them
to  their definitions.

@hrule{}


@c ================================================================================
@node Histogram Construction
@section Histogram Construction

Suppose we have a sequence of numbers; I'll assume here they're in an FSet seq.  We want to
calculate the data for a histogram, which divides the input axis into evenly-spaced buckets, then
counts how many of the numbers fall into each bucket.  (We're just going to prepare the bucket
counts; actually plotting the histogram is left as an exercise for the reader.)

An easy way to do this is with an FSet bag.  Here's one way to write it:

@example
(in-package :fset2-user)

(defun histogram-1 (nums bucket-width)
  (let ((result (@href{Macro wb-bag, wb-bag})))
    (@href{Macro do-seq, do-seq} (num nums)
      (@href{Macro includef, includef} result (* bucket-width (floor num bucket-width))))
    result))
@end example

I've used @code{wb-bag} instead of the default CHAMP bags so the result will be printed in
increasing bucket order.

Go ahead, try it now.  You can generate some sample data by doing this:

@example
(defparameter *nums* (@href{GMap, gmap} (:result @href{GMap result type seq, seq})
                           (@href{Macro fn, fn} (_) (+ (random 100.0) (random 100.0) (random 100.0)))
                           (:arg @href{GMap arg type index, index} 0 1000)))
@end example

By adding three uniformly-distributed random numbers, we should begin to approximate a normal
distribution, better known as a bell curve.  Here's a sample result I got:

@example
FSET2-USER> @b{(histogram-1 *nums* 20.0)}
#@{% #%(20.0 13) #%(40.0 16) #%(60.0 59) #%(80.0 96) #%(100.0 116) #%(120.0 141) #%(140.0 138)
   #%(160.0 141) #%(180.0 106) #%(200.0 77) #%(220.0 57) #%(240.0 25) #%(260.0 15) %@}
@end example

In each pair, the first number is the bucket base; the second is the number of samples that fell in
the bucket.  So, 13 samples were between 20.0 and 40.0, @i{etc.}.  You can get a more detailed view
with a smaller bucket size; play with it!

Personally, I would write it using @href{GMap, GMap}:

@example
(defun histogram-2 (nums bucket-width)
  (@href{GMap, gmap} (:result @href{GMap result type wb-bag, wb-bag}) (@href{Macro fn, fn} (x) (* bucket-width (floor x bucket-width)))
        (:arg @href{GMap arg type seq, seq} nums)))
@end example


@c ================================================================================
@node Graph Walking
@section Graph Walking

This section presents a simple example of code that might be written to walk a (potentially cyclic)
directed graph, calling a provided function on each node (presumably, the function has some useful
side-effect).  First, here's one way it might be written in plain CL:

@example
(defun map-graph-nodes-cl-1 (fun graph)
  (let ((seen (make-hash-table :test 'eq))
        (workset (list (graph-start graph))))
    (loop while workset
      (let ((node (pop workset)))
        (unless (gethash node seen)
          (funcall fun node)
          (setf (gethash node seen) t)
          (dolist (succ (node-successors node))
            (pushnew succ workset)))))))
@end example

Things to note about this:

@itemize
@item It uses a hash table to represent the ``seen'' set, but a list for the workset.
@item It does some @code{nil} punning (@code{while workset}).
@item @code{pop} removes the first element of the list and returns it.
@item @code{pushnew} is O(@i{n}).
@end itemize

Even though the @code{seen} set uses a hash table, because of the linear-time @code{pushnew} used to
update @code{workset}, this version will bog down on large graphs.  Of course, CL does give you ways
to fix this, but the code gets more verbose:

@example
(defun map-graph-nodes-cl-2 (fun graph)
  (let ((seen (make-hash-table :test 'eq))
        (workset (make-hash-table :test 'eq)))
    (setf (gethash (graph-start graph) workset) t)
    (loop while (plusp (hash-table-count workset))
      (let ((node (block arb
                    (maphash (lambda (k v)
                               (declare (ignore v))
                               (return-from arb k))
                             workset))))
        (remhash node workset)
        (unless (gethash node seen)
          (funcall fun node)
          (setf (gethash node seen) t)
          (dolist (succ (node-successors node))
            (setf (gethash succ workset) t)))))))
@end example

Here @code{workset} is also a hash table, instead of a list, but the code is noticeably longer,
mostly because CL has no hash table operation like FSet's @href{Method arb (set), arb}; one has to
be hacked up using @code{maphash} and a nonlocal return.

Here's what it looks like using FSet --- elegant @emph{and} fast:

@example
(defun map-graph-nodes-fset (fun graph)
  (let ((seen (@href{Macro set, set}))
        (workset (@href{Macro set, set} (graph-start graph))))
    (loop while (@href{Function nonempty?, nonempty?} workset)
      (let ((node (@href{Method arb (set), arb} workset)))
        (@href{Macro excludef, excludef} workset node)
        (unless (@href{Method contains? (set), contains?} seen node)
          (funcall fun node)
          (@href{Macro includef, includef} seen node)
          (@href{Macro unionf, unionf} workset
                  (node-successors node)))))))
@end example

@c ================================================================================
@node Case Study: CL-Cont
@section Case Study: CL-Cont

CL-Cont, originally by Slava Akhmechet, shows what code looks like when it's crying out for
functional collections.  Some relevant snippets:

@example
(defstruct (call/cc-context (:conc-name ctx-))
  "A structure that represents a context used during call/cc
transformation."
  (block-tags (make-hash-table))
  (go-tags (make-hash-table))
  (local-functions nil))

(defun copy-hash-table (ht)
  "Shallow hashtable copy."
  (let ((nht (make-hash-table :size (hash-table-size ht))))
    (maphash (lambda (key value)
	       (setf (gethash key nht) value))
	     ht)
    nht))

(defun copy-transformation-context (ctx)
  "Copies transformation context. This is used for cases when the
context has to be 'frozen' in time and used at a later transformation
stage."
  (let ((transf-env (copy-structure ctx)))
    (setf (ctx-block-tags transf-env) (copy-hash-table (ctx-block-tags transf-env))
	  (ctx-go-tags transf-env) (copy-hash-table (ctx-go-tags transf-env))
	  (ctx-local-functions transf-env) (copy-list (ctx-local-functions transf-env)))
    transf-env))
@end example

It's not at all unusual for compiler-related code, which walks a tree maintaining environments
mapping names to something, to be naturally expressed using persistent functional collections; and
we see a clear example of that here.  Anytime you find yourself copying hash tables, you would
probably be happier using a functional map.

Here's some more CL-Cont code (with some less-relevant parts omitted):

@example
(defcpstransformer block (cons k-expr env)
  ;; [...]
  (let ((k (gensym)))
    (unwind-protect
	 (progn
	   (push k (gethash (cadr cons) (ctx-block-tags *ctx*)))
	   `(let ((,k ,k-expr))
	      (declare (ignorable ,k))
	      ,(expr-sequence->cps (cddr cons) k env)))
      (pop (gethash (cadr cons) (ctx-block-tags *ctx*))))))

(defcpstransformer return-from (cons k-expr env)
  ;; [...]
  (expr->cps (caddr cons) (or (car (gethash (cadr cons) (ctx-block-tags *ctx*)))
			      (error "There is no block named ~A" (cadr cons)))
	     env))
@end example

The context is passed via special variable @code{*ctx*}.  (I don't recommend the use of a special
variable here --- better to make it an explicit parameter of the functions that reference it --- but
let's leave that aside.)  The code uses @code{unwind-protect} to retract changes to the context on
exiting a scope; this idiom is used in two other places.  The function
@code{copy-transformation-context} that we saw above is used to package a snapshot of the context
into a form invoking macro @code{transform-forms-in-env}, so that a subsequent expansion of this
form will restart the transformation process using the captured context.  With persistent functional
collections, neither the @code{unwind-protect} nor the copy is necessary.

Here's what I would do to clean this up with FSet.

First, delete the code in the first example box above: the @code{defstruct} of @code{call/cc-context},
along with functions @code{copy-hash-table} and @code{copy-transformer-context}.

Then replace those definitions with these:
@example
;;; Block-tags and go-tags are maps from names to continuation expressions.
(@href{Macro define-tuple-key, define-tuple-key} +ctx-block-tags+ :default (@href{Macro map, map}))
(@href{Macro define-tuple-key, define-tuple-key} +ctx-go-tags+ :default (@href{Macro map, map}))
;;; Local-functions is just a set of function names locally bound.
(@href{Macro define-tuple-key, define-tuple-key} +ctx-local-functions+ :default (@href{Macro set, set}))

(defun make-call/cc-context ()
  (@href{Macro tuple, tuple}))
@end example

Second, replace the transformer definitions shown above for @code{block} and @code{return-from} with
these:

@example
(defcpstransformer block (cons k-expr env)
  ;; [...]
  (let ((k (gensym))
	(*ctx* *ctx*))
    (setf (@href{The @code{@@} Macro, @@} (@href{The @code{@@} Macro, @@} *ctx* +ctx-block-tags+) (cadr cons)) k)
    `(let ((,k ,k-expr))
       (declare (ignorable ,k))
       ,(expr-sequence->cps (cddr cons) k env))))

(defcpstransformer return-from (cons k-expr env)
  ;; [...]
  (expr->cps (caddr cons) (or (@href{The @code{@@} Macro, @@} (@href{The @code{@@} Macro, @@} *ctx* +ctx-block-tags+) (cadr cons))
			      (error "There is no block named ~A" (cadr cons)))
	     env))
@end example

Third, make similar changes to the two other places where @code{unwind-protect} is being used.

And fourth and finally, simply replace calls to @code{copy-transformer-context} by their argument.



