@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

This chapter offers a brief tutorial, followed by some small examples comparing how things are done
natively in CL with how they can be done with FSet.  It concludes with discussion of practical
considerations that are likely to arise when you first start using FSet in a project.

@include Tutorial.texi

@c @include Examples.texi

@node Using FSet
@section Using FSet

I expect there will be two primary ways that FSet gets used; I'll call them ``FSet-light'' and
``FSet-heavy''. In the ``light'' mode of use, FSet types and operations will be sprinkled into code —
perhaps, code that was originally written without FSet — but the code will mostly use non-FSet
collections.  In the ``heavy'' mode, on the other hand, code uses FSet for most things (of course,
Lisp code will always use lists for some purposes).

There are some choices to be made based on this difference.  The major one is whether to import the
external FSet symbols into the package(s) you are developing in, so that they can be referenced
without package prefixes.  Some projects have a blanket policy against importing symbols, but if
yours allows importing, and you plan to use FSet heavily, I think you should consider it.  This is
the mode in which I use FSet personally; it does give the feeling of using a new dialect of Lisp,
which you could find desirable or not, depending on your tastes.

A small choice is whether to use @code{lookup} or @code{@@} (@pxref{The @code{@@} Macro}).  In
FSet-light code you should probably use @code{lookup} since the name will be easier to recognize,
but in FSet-heavy code I think you may as well use @code{@@}.

If your project doesn't permit importing, or if you're planning to use FSet only in a few places,
just use an explicit @code{fset2:} prefix on FSet symbols.  (The older @code{fset} package is still
provided for compatibility with codebases that have been using it, but I don't recommend it for new
code.)

This is clearly desirable for FSet-heavy code (see the @code{defpackage :fset2-user} form in
@code{defs.lisp} for an example of how to do this, including a list of symbols you will need to
@code{shadowing-import} from either @code{fset2} or @code{cl}).

@node Importing FSet Symbols
@subsection Importing FSet Symbols

@cindex Package setup
@cindex FSet packages
There's yet another choice to make, once you've decided to import FSet symbols: do you want all of
them, most of them, or just the ones you're actually using?

If you want the full FSet experience, and you're starting a new project, the easiest way is to add
@code{:fset2} to the @code{:use} clause of your @code{defpackage} form, as in this example, and copy
the @code{:shadowing-import-from} clause:

@example
(defpackage :my-package
  (:use :cl :fset2
        :misc-extensions.gmap :misc-extensions.mvlet)  ; explained in next section
  (:shadowing-import-from :fset2
			  ;; Shadowed type/constructor names
			  #:set #:map
			  ;; Shadowed set operations
			  #:union #:intersection #:set-difference #:complement
			  ;; Shadowed sequence operations
			  #:first #:last #:subseq #:reverse #:sort #:stable-sort
			  #:reduce
			  #:find #:find-if #:find-if-not
			  #:count #:count-if #:count-if-not
			  #:position #:position-if #:position-if-not
			  #:remove #:remove-if #:remove-if-not
			  #:substitute #:substitute-if #:substitute-if-not
			  #:some #:every #:notany #:notevery
			  #:search #:mismatch))
@end example

However, there's a downside to @code{:use}, causing many people to avoid it.  Because it imports all
external symbols of the specified packages, it can cause name conflicts with your code.  This is
especially true if you're adding FSet to an existing codebase, but even in a new one, there is a
possibility that I might add new exports to package @code{fset2} at some point in the future that
would cause a conflict.  I don't think the odds of such a conflict are large, but the risk exists:
you could upgrade FSet one day and have something break for this reason.

Because of that, the generally recommended approach is to use an @code{:import-from} clause instead,
to import only the symbols you are using or think you are likely to use --- or even the full export
list as it stands at the moment.  The downside of @emph{that} is that the list may get quite long;
package @code{fset2}, as of this writing, exports 326 symbols.  Still, you may prefer this approach,
to protect yourself against future exports.

The next question is whether you want all the above shadowing-imports, which are shadowing builtin
CL symbols.  Here is a description of each of these symbols, to help you understand the consequences
of importing it and to decide whether you want to.

@table @asis
@item @code{set}
A no-brainer: import @code{fset2:set}. The CL @code{set} is archaic, deprecated in the ANSI CL spec,
and easily replaced with @code{(setf (symbol-value @dots{})  @dots{})}, which is stylistically
preferable anyway. @code{fset2:set} names both a type and a constructor macro for that type.

@item @code{map}
This one is a little harder, because @code{cl:map} has perfectly legitimate uses, though it's rarer
than @code{mapcar}. Personally, I never use it because I use @href{GMap, my GMap macro}
instead, but others might miss it. (FSet has a similar operation called @code{image}.) Again,
@code{fset2:map} names both a type and a constructor macro.

@item @code{union}, @code{intersection}, @code{set-difference}
These are generic functions, with methods for lists that invoke the CL builtins.  I recommend
importing them.

@item @code{complement}
A generic function, with a method for functions that invokes the CL builtin.  Rarely used, but you
may as well import it anyway.

@item @code{first}, @code{last}
These are generic functions that return the first or last element of a sequence, which can be a Lisp
sequence or an FSet seq.  These differ from the CL builtins in two ways: they work on more types
than lists, and @code{last} returns the last @emph{element} of its argument, unlike @code{cl:last},
which returns the last @emph{cons} (the cons whose @code{car} is the last element).
@xref{Divergences from Common Lisp} for further discussion.  I recommend importing them, though if
you have any existing calls to CL @code{last}. you'll have to either change them to @code{lastcons}
(which is a better name anyway; FSet exports this) or add an explicit @code{cl:} qualifier.

@anchor{Shadowed CL sequence operations}
@item @code{subseq}, @code{reverse}
@itemx @code{sort}, @code{stable-sort}
@itemx @code{reduce}
@itemx @code{find}, @code{find-if}, @code{find-if-not}
@itemx @code{count}, @code{count-if}, @code{count-if-not}
@itemx @code{position}, @code{position-if}, @code{position-if-not}
@itemx @code{remove}, @code{remove-if}, @code{remove-if-not}
@itemx @code{substitute}, @code{substitute-if}, @code{substitute-if-not}
@itemx @code{some}, @code{every}, @code{notany}, @code{notevery}
@itemx @code{search}, @code{mismatch}
These are now generic functions that accept both CL sequences and FSet seqs, with compatibility
methods on CL sequences that simply forward the call to the original CL versions.  There is little
reason not to prefer these; I recommend importing them.

--- Well, there is one minor catch.  If your code does @code{(setf (subseq @dots{}) @dots{})}
anywhere, you will need to add an explicit @code{cl:} qualifier to the @code{subseq}; otherwise the
expression will cause a runtime error.  FSet does not define a setf expander for
@code{fset2:subseq}, and it would be unsafe for it to do so, as its behavior as a @code{setf} place
would not match that of @code{cl:subseq}.  But this is such a rare usage that you're unlikely to
encounter this problem.
@end table

Here are some Lisp sequence operations for which FSet does @emph{not} export a symbol with the same
name.  I have omitted mutating operations, for which FSet of course has no equivalent.

@table @asis
@item @code{elt}
The FSet operation (which applies to maps as well as seqs) is @code{lookup}; see also @ref{The
@code{@@} Macro}.

@item @code{length}
The FSet operation (which applies to all FSet collections, not just seqs) is @code{size}.

@item @code{remove-duplicates}, @code{merge}
Use FSet sets.
@end table

@node Misc-Extensions
@subsection Misc-Extensions

@uref{https://gitlab.common-lisp.net/misc-extensions/misc-extensions/,Misc-Extensions} is a small
library of macros that is used by FSet and which FSet users might also find handy to use in their
code.  One of these is an extensible iteration macro called @href{GMap, GMap}.  The rest are
discussed here.

I use @code{mvlet}, @code{mvlet*}, and @code{fn} elsewhere in this book, so you'll want to read
about them below.  The rest of the section can be skipped on first reading.
@c &&& Maybe cut the other topics?

@defmac nvlet (binding-clause@dots{}) declaration@dots{} @r{&body} form@dots{}
@defmacx nvlet* (binding-clause@dots{}) declaration@dots{} @r{&body} form@dots{}
@defmacx nlet (binding-clause@dots{}) declaration@dots{} @r{&body} form@dots{}

For writing code in a mostly-functional style, Common Lisp's multiple-value feature is extremely
useful (I make heavy use of it both internally within FSet and in the API).  But the most important
primitive the language provides for receiving multiple values from a call,
@code{multiple-value-bind}, is a bit clunky to use.  First, its long name would be appropriate for a
rarely used operation, but in the mostly-functional style, it can be used quite frequently.
Second, combining it with other bindings can be done only by nesting; where @code{cl:let} and
@code{cl:let*} let you bind several variables to the values of their respective init-forms,
@code{multiple-value-bind} receives values from only a single form.

Misc-Extensions provides three related macros to elegantly and succinctly bind lists of one or more
variables to the one or more values of their respective init-forms.  All of these allow more than one
variable in a binding clause; the last element of the clause is the init-form, and the preceding
elements are the variables to be bound to the values of the init-form.

The two that I expect most people will want to use are @code{mvlet} and @code{mvlet*}.
@code{mvlet}, like @code{cl:let}, makes all bindings in parallel, so the init-forms can refer to
variables of the same names in the containing scope.  @code{mvlet*}, like @code{cl:let*}, makes them
sequentially, so each init-form can refer to any of the variables bound in the preceding clauses.
Except for being able to bind multiple values, they are almost perfectly upward-compatible with the
CL operators, with a minor caveat I will return to below.

@code{nlet} generalizes the other two by making it possible to do any combination of parallel and
sequential binding.  It allows the binding clauses to be nested to indicate sequential binding: more
deeply nested clauses are within the scopes of bindings made by less deeply nested clauses.  Within
a level, bindings are parallel.  I'm personally fond of @code{nlet}, but some people find the
heavily parenthesized syntax a little off-putting.

Here are examples of all three.

@verbatim
  (let ((a (foo)))
    ...
    (mvlet ((a b (bar))
            (c (baz a))  ; outer 'a'
            ...)
      ...)

    (mvlet* ((a b (bar))
             (c (baz a))  ; inner 'a'
             ...)
      ...)

    (nlet ((a b (bar))
           (c (baz a))  ; outer 'a'
           ...)
      ...)

    (nlet ((a b (bar))
           ((c (baz a)))  ; inner 'a'
           ...)
      ...))
@end verbatim

In all four examples we see @code{a} and @code{b} being bound to the first two values of
@code{(bar)} in the first clause, but whether the reference to @code{a} in the second clause refers
to the @code{a} in the outer scope or the one that was just bound depends on whether @code{mvlet} or
@code{mvlet*} was used, or in the @code{nlet} case, the nesting level of the second clause.

A more complex @code{nlet} example:

@verbatim
  (nlet ((a b c (zot))
         ((d (quux a c))
          ((e f (mumble b d))
           (g (mung a))))
         ((h (frobozz c))
          ((i (xyzzy h))))
         (*print-level* 3))
    ...)
@end verbatim

First @code{a}, @code{b}, and @code{c} are bound to the first three values of @code{(zot)}, and in
parallel, @code{*print-level*} is bound to 3; then @code{d} and @code{h} are bound; then @code{e},
@code{f}, @code{g}, and @code{i} are bound.

As this example illustrates, all bindings at a given nesting level are done in parallel, with all
bindings at a deeper level following.  Stylistically, it is expected that init-forms in nested
clauses will refer only to variables bound in containing clauses.  However, this is not enforced; for
instance, the init-form for @code{g} could refer to @code{h}, since the latter is bound one level
out.

The macros correctly handle @code{declare} forms at the beginning of the body, emitting the
declarations at the correct level within the expansion so that they apply to the binding named.

The symbol @code{nlet} is exported from package @code{new-let}.  It also exports the same macro under
the name @code{let}, so that it can shadow @code{cl:let}; this is how I use it, though again, I
suspect most people will not want to do that.  Anyway, because @code{new-let:let} is exported, if you
@code{(:use :new-let)} in your package declaration, you will also need to include a
@code{:shadowing-import-from} clause to say which version of @code{let} you want to use.

@code{mvlet} and @code{mvlet*} are initially exported from @code{new-let} as well, but to make them
a little more convenient to use (especially for those not yet expert in dealing with CL packages), I
created another package @code{mvlet} that re-exports only these two symbols.  So you can say
@code{(:use :mvlet)} to get them, without having to shadowing-import anything.

Historical note: I first wrote @code{nlet} in 1980, on the MIT Lisp Machine, and have used it ever
since in my own projects.

(Paul Rodriguez's @uref{https://github.com/ruricolist/serapeum/, Serapeum} also includes
implementations of @code{mvlet} and @code{mvlet*}.)
@end defmac

@defmac fn (parameter@dots{}) declaration@dots{} form@dots{}

For very small lambda expressions, the six characters taken by the word @code{lambda} can be a
significant fraction of the total.  If the body doesn't reference all the parameters, moreover,
you'll want to add a @code{(declare (ignore ...))} for the unused ones, which adds to the verbosity.
The @code{fn} macro helps with both annoyances.  Obviously, its name is quite short.  (Those willing
to set foot on the slippery slope of Unicode could use @code{λ}, of course, but I've been afraid to
go there yet, lest my code wind up as an unintelligible mass of obscure mathematical symbols and cat
emojis.) Also, you can use either a bare @code{_} or a name beginning with @code{_} as a parameter
name, to indicate an ignored parameter; @code{fn} automatically inserts the required @code{ignore}
declaration.

One catch, though, is that if you inadvertently write @code{#'(fn ...)}, you will get a
probably-unintelligible compiler error.  Just delete the @code{#'}.
@end defmac

@anchor{Macro deflex}
@defmac deflex var @r{&optional} val doc
Declares @code{var} as a global lexical (non-special) variable, and if @code{val} is supplied and
@code{var} is not already bound, initializes it to @code{val}.  @code{doc}, if supplied, is taken as
a documentation string.  Locally binding the same name creates a new lexical variable, with no
effect on the global one.
@end defmac

@defmac deflex-reinit var val  @r{&optional} doc
Declares @code{var} as a global lexical (non-special) variable and initializes it to @code{val}.
@code{doc}, if supplied, is taken as a documentation string.  Locally binding the same name creates
a new lexical variable, with no effect on the global one.
@end defmac

@defmac isetq var val@dots{}
Some implementations, notably CMUCL and SBCL, issue a rather verbose warning if you use @code{setq}
to set a previously undeclared global variable in the REPL.  I find this annoying.  I could use
@code{defvar} or @code{defparameter} instead, but they return the name of the variable, not its
value, so if I want the value printed, I have to enter the name at the next prompt.  Besides, using
one of those declares the variable special, so I have to be careful to put @code{*earmuffs*} on my
variable names.  The other Lisps I've used for many years have quietly accepted @code{setq} of a new
variable in the REPL, without declaring it special.

So I wrote a macro @code{isetq} (``interactive @code{setq}'').  It uses the same technique as
@code{deflex} to make the variable being assigned to into a global lexical, so I don't need to use
earmuffs to prevent name collisions with local variables in my code.

@code{isetq} is only for interactive use; it is @strong{@emph{not recommended for use in programs}}.
@end defmac

@c Maybe don't mention rflet and rmacrolet here???
@defmac rlabels form @r{&body} function-binding-clause@dots{}
@defmacx rflet form @r{&body} function-binding-clause@dots{}
@defmacx rmacrolet form @r{&body} function-binding-clause@dots{}

It's not uncommon to use @code{labels} to define a set of several mutually-recursive functions,
whose code can fill a screen or two, then have the body of the @code{labels} kick off the recursion
with a one-liner that just calls one of the functions.  This strikes me as a little hard to read ---
you have to scroll all the way to the bottom to find the initial values of the recursion variables
--- and also a little wasteful of indentation space.  So I introduced a macro @code{rlabels}
(``reversed @code{labels}''), which puts the initial call first as a single subform, then takes the
function-binding clauses as its @code{&body} parameter, saving seven columns of indentation.

The effect on code layout is simiiar to that of the @code{named-let} macro that some people use, but
it's more general as it can define multiple local functions.

There are also @code{rflet} and @code{rmacrolet}, but they're rarely useful.
@end defmac

@anchor{Succinct Class Definitions With @code{define-class}}
@defmac define-class name (superclass@dots{}) (slot-specifier@dots{}) class-option@dots{}
@end defmac

As everyone knows, @code{defclass} forms tend to be rather verbose and repetitive:

@verbatim
(defclass frob (widget)
    ((color :initarg :color :reader frob-color
       :initform (error "A color must be specified.")
       :documentation "The color of the frob.")
     (height :initarg :height :accessor frob-height
       :initform 3.0
       :documentation "The height of the frob in cm."))
  (:documentation "The class of all frobs."))
@end verbatim

I've written a @code{define-class} macro to shorten them.  It is completely upward compatible with
@code{defclass}; you could just replace @code{defclass} with @code{define-class} and have a valid
invocation that would produce the same result.  But @code{define-class} provides several features to
make the definition more succinct.  Use only the ones you like!  The big change is that where
@code{defclass} slot descriptions have a strict alternating keyword-value syntax,
@code{define-class} is more flexible.

@itemize
@item
A doc string for the class can be placed just before the slot specs (visually similar to where doc
strings for functions go).
@item
The first element of a slot specifier, which is normally a slot name, can instead be a list
@code{(slot-name initform)}; an @code{:initform} option will be generated.
@item
@code{:may-init} generates @code{:initarg :slot-name}.
@item
@code{:must-init} generates @code{:initarg :slot-name}, and also an @code{:initform} that signals an
error if the argument is not provided to @code{make-instance}.
@item
@code{:readable} generates @code{:reader gf-name}, and @code{:accessible} generates
@code{:accessor gf-name}, where @code{gf-name} is either the slot name or, if a @code{:conc-name}
@emph{class} option is supplied, that string prepended to the slot name.
@item
Additionally, @code{:constant} is an abbreviation for @code{:must-init :readable} if the spec
contains no initform, or @code{:may-init :readable} if there is an initform (in either syntax).
@item
And @code{:variable} is an abbreviation for @code{:may-init :accessible}.
@item
A doc string can appear anywhere in the slot options; @code{:documentation} will be inserted.
@item
Or, you can use @code{:doc} as an abbreviation for @code{:documentation}.
@end itemize

So, here's the above example using @code{define-class}; 347 characters have been reduced to 186, and
I think it's actually easier to understand:

@verbatim
(define-class frob (widget)
  "The class of all frobs."
  ((color :constant "The color of the frob.")
   ((height 3.0) :variable "The height of the frob in cm."))
  (:conc-name #:frob-))
@end verbatim

Let me emphasize: you can still use the @code{defclass} slot options in any case where the above
features do not do what you want; for instance, if you want a different reader/accessor name for a
particular slot than what @code{define-class} would have used.
