@ignore

© 2026 Scott L. Burson

This document is published under the Creative Commons
@uref{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/, CC BY-NC-SA 4.0} license.  This license
enables reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format for
noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator.  If you remix,
adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms.
@end ignore

@node Introduction and Obligatory Hype
@unnumbered Introduction and Obligatory Hype

FSet is a functional, set-theoretic collections library for Common Lisp.  @dfn{Functional} means
that all update operations return a new collection rather than modifying an existing one in place.
Don't be daunted by the term ``set-theoretic''!  It just means that the collections have clean
semantics, and may be nested arbitrarily with no additional programmer effort — for instance, sets
may contain sets, maps may be keyed by sets, @i{etc.}

FSet is designed to be an excellent @emph{default} choice for collections in Common Lisp programs:
you can use them in practically all cases where you need a collection.  It has a wide API, with
sets, maps, bags (multisets), seqs (sequences), binary relations, tuples, and more; and lots of
useful operations on these types.  FSet is very much intended to be useful for general programming;
I believe that functional collections are superior from a software engineering perspective, leading
to more elegant and reliable code.  (The same thesis drove Rich Hickey's design of Clojure.)

Along with supporting and encouraging the use of functional collections, FSet also seeks to bring
Common Lisp up to date, adding to it data structures invented since the language was designed.
These data structures greatly expand the space of algorithms that can be written in an elegant
functional style and still run efficiently.

This book has two intended audiences.  The larger one is Common Lisp programmers, or people who at
least have been learning the language, who want to explore the benefits of modern functional collections.  

There's a second audience, however, I also hope to reach, consisting not of people who expect to use
Common Lisp or FSet, but rather designers of other languages and/or libraries for those languages.
I refer such readers to the chapters @ref{Conceptual Background} and @ref{Recommendations for
Language Designers}; the other chapters will still be worth reading, I think, but of less
importance.

For those who may want to actually use FSet, though, this book does assume some basic proficiency in
Common Lisp; I don't recommend it as a first text for those learning the language.  You will need to
know, at the very least:

@itemize
@item how to run your chosen CL implementation and interact with its REPL
@item what to do when an error brings up the debugger
@item how to write simple Lisp functions that operate on lists
@item the difference between a function and a macro (``Functions compute; macros translate.'' ---
David A. Moon)
@end itemize

For a fuller understanding, these topics will also be helpful:

@itemize
@item how to define classes with @code{defclass} or @code{deftype}
@item how CLOS generic functions work, including how to define methods with @code{defmethod}
@end itemize

@hrule{}


@c ================================================================================
@node Why I Wrote FSet
@section Why I Wrote FSet

It has now been over four decades since the publication of @emph{Common Lisp: the Language}.  In
that time, many new languages have been created and have seen significant use; of these, some have
already started to fade from popularity.  Somehow, Common Lisp (CL) has managed to maintain a
relatively small but nonetheless devoted following --- which is growing.

What accounts for CL's tenacity? The question has been discussed @i{ad nauseam} online, but let me
summarize my own view:

@itemize
@item
Its metaprogramming facilities --- which make it easy to extend the language --- are almost
unmatched, except by other members of the Lisp family.

@item
REPL-based development, with its usually immediate turnaround from editing to testing to debugging,
makes for a pleasurable and productive developer experience.

@item
CL's design largely avoids sacrificing elegance for performance, yet it was designed to be
efficiently implementable.  The result is expressiveness and convenience similar to that of
interpreted languages like Python, but with far better performance, approaching and occasionally
exceeding that of low-level languages like C++.
@end itemize

Also, the language specification has not changed since the publication of the ANSI standard in 1994.
This may seem to be a disadvantage --- no one would argue that ANSI CL is a perfect language! ---
but two factors conspire to make it otherwise.  First, the stability of the language makes code
written in it remarkably long-lived.  With most languages, downloading a 30-year-old program and
trying to run it is an exercise in frustration.  Language evolution, changes in CPU word length, new
libraries obsoleting old ones --- there are many ways software can ``rot''.  But in CL, 30-year-old
code usually runs without modification.

And second, CL is so malleable, because of its metaprogramming facilities, that most evolutions that
would require changing the specification of a more conventional language can be accomplished in CL
simply by writing a library.  This malleability greatly alleviates the pressure that would otherwise
be present to update the language.

That observation brings me to FSet.

Lisp, as you probably know, was invented around a very simple yet general data structure, the
externally-chained singly-linked list.  External (aka ``non-intrusive'') chaining means that the
nodes of the list are distinct objects from the elements, so that an object can be an element of
many different lists.  Thus, lists, in this sense, were perhaps the first variable-sized
collections; arrays already existed, of course, but they were of fixed size.  They were also among
the first heterogeneously-typed collections, in that the elements did not all have to be of the same
type; they could be symbols, numbers, or, recursively, other lists.

And, lists were among the first functional collections.  By "functional" I mean that collections are
not modified in place; operations we might normally think of as modifying an existing collection
instead produce a new one with the requested change applied.  (I'll say more about this property
below.)

So it is not too strong to say that Lisp was invented to support the writing of programs on
functional collections.  Yet for Lisp to become a practical programming language, this vision had to
yield to certain realities.  Although lists are very general, many kinds of code are hard to write
efficiently using only lists, and especially using them only functionally.  Even as early as
LISP-1.5, Lisp abandoned purity: it had operators to mutate cons cells (as Lisp calls its list
nodes) and also had mutable arrays.  By the late 1970s, when Lisp was being used as the systems
language for the Lisp Machines, it also had mutable user-defined objects, hash tables, @i{etc.}
These changes were necessary: the design of absolutely pure functional languages would remain a
research topic for some time yet.  Even the design of functional data structures did not bear much
practical fruit until the 1990s and early 2000s.

Common Lisp's built-in data structures thus make it possible to write code in a functional style, up
to a point.  You can only use lists.  You must avoid mutating them.  Many list operations have poor
time complexity.  Indexing takes linear (O(@i{n})) time, as does appending two lists.  Set union and
intersection take quadratic (O(@i{n}@sup{2})) time.  And so on.  For many purposes, arrays or hash
tables would be better, but these are mutable types that make poor choices for functional
algorithms; while you @emph{could} use them functionally, you'd have to copy them frequently, which
would take linear time.

So in practice, quite a lot of CL code has been written procedurally, using mutable objects of
various kinds.  While I'm not suggesting that the procedural style is always inappropriate ---
programs change state as well as computing values --- the benefits of judicious use of the functional
style are becoming well known.  These include greater clarity, easier debugging, better isolation of
modules, and simpler thread-safety.

In the decades since CL was designed, researchers have come up with data structures appropriate for
functional collections, and more recent languages utilize them.  Rich Hickey's Clojure has probably
done the most to popularize functional collections, but they are also available in Scala and other
languages --- even, by now, including Python.

So FSet has a dual mission: first, to bring Common Lisp up to date, by giving it a much richer
ensemble of functional collection data structures, to greatly expand the space of algorithms that
can be written in an elegant functional style and still run efficiently; and second, as with Clojure,
to support and encourage the use of functional collections for general programming.

Any collections library has strengths and weaknesses; none is good at everything.  FSet seeks,
however, to have no @emph{fatal} weaknesses that make it terrible for some uses; it tries to do
everything reasonably well, at the possible expense of being the best at any one thing.  This means,
in roughly decreasing order of priority:

@itemize
@item
Every operation has acceptable time complexity.

@item
The interfaces are general, easy to use, and include all commonly desired functionality.

@item
The implementation is well integrated with Common Lisp.
@item
Every operation is reasonably fast in a constant-factor sense, considering that updates are
functional (and thus inevitably more expensive than imperative updates).

@item
Space overhead is reasonably small.
@end itemize


@c ================================================================================
@node Benefits of Functional Collections
@section Benefits of Functional Collections

The case for using functional collections is much better known now than it was in 2007, when I first
released FSet.  Rich Hickey made his first release of Clojure the same year; his design also
embraced functional collections, and its popularity has done much to make programmers aware of their
advantages.  Those include:

@itemize
@item @strong{Clearer, more elegant code}:
Code written in a functional style is often easier to understand than code involving shared state,
because to understand what a given expression does, you only need to know what operation it's
performing and what the argument values are.  The data flow is all made explicit; no other state of
the program is relevant.

@item @strong{Concurrency safety}:
Reading from functional collections is thread-safe without locking, as is iteration.  Iteration is
also safe from concurrent updates in the same thread.  While read-update-write operations still
require synchronization, Software Transactional Memory can be used instead of locking, potentially
improving parallelism.

@item @strong{Persistence}:
The term ``persistent'', in this context, refers to data structures that can efficiently retain
their past states; it has nothing to do with the use of nonvolatile storage.  Persistent functional
collections can be used to easily implement ``undo'' functionality; all that's needed is to retain
the past states one might want to return to.

@item @strong{Cleaner interfaces}:
Functional collections can be returned from interfaces with no concern that the client might modify
them, breaking the module that owns them; defensive copying against this possibility is not required
either.

@item @strong{Easier testing}:
Functional code is generally easier to test and debug, because once you have appropriate arguments
constructed, you can call the function in question any number of times, without it altering state
that you would have to reset.
@end itemize

My strong opinion is that functional collections are the best @emph{default} choice for the vast
majority of programming tasks: the kind everyone should be using except in the very few cases in
which performance concerns dictate a different choice.  Furthermore, language and library designers
should support the movement toward functional collections by providing high-quality implementations.
FSet is my contribution to this effort.
