@node Iterating over FSet Collections
@chapter Iterating over FSet Collections

FSet provides a plethora of ways to iterate over a collection once you have created it:

@itemize
@item procedural macros (@code{do-*})
@item the higher-order operators @code{image}, @code{filter}, and @code{reduce}
@item iterators, both stateful and functional
@item the @code{at-index} operation
@item the versatile GMap macro (described below)
@item the popular Iterate macro
@item there's even a third-party library, @uref{https://github.com/fosskers/transducers, CL-Transducers}, with  FSet support
@end itemize

Just to give a taste of these, here's an example.  Suppose @code{nums} holds a seq of numbers, and
you want to compute their sum.  Here are the ways you could do it:

@example
@r{;;; procedurally}
(let ((sum 0))
  (do-seq (n nums :value sum)
    (incf sum n)))
@r{;;; using `reduce'}
(reduce #'+ nums)
@r{;;; using a stateful iterator}
(do ((it (iterator nums))
     (sum 0 (+ sum (funcall it ':get))))
    ((funcall it ':done?) sum))
@r{;;; using a functional iterator}
(do ((it (fun-iterator nums) (funcall it ':rest))
     (sum 0 (+ sum (funcall it ':first))))
    ((funcall it ':empty?) sum))
@r{;;; using `at-index'}
(let ((sum 0))
  (dotimes (i (size nums) sum)
    (incf sum (at-index nums i))))
@r{;;; using GMap}
(gmap (:result sum) :id (:arg seq nums))
@r{;;; using Iterate}
(iter (for n in-seq nums) (sum n))
@r{;;; using CL-Transducers}
(transduce #'pass #'+ nums)
@end example

I wouldn't recommend picking a favorite based just on this very simple example, but I can make a few
general comments:

@itemize
@item
If all you want is a reduction, as in this example, it's hard to beat @code{reduce} for elegance.
@item
Using an iterator manually is rather verbose; I don't recommend it unless you really need it.
@item
Iterate, though it reads somewhat procedurally, is concise and clear.
@item
GMap and CL-Transducers have a similar flavor, at least in this simple case.
@end itemize

Every collection has an iteration order that reflects how the elements or pairs are stored
internally.  For the CHAMP collections, this order is arbitrary; it's based on the hash values of
the elements or keys, so while it is actually deterministic --- two collections with the same
elements and hash function will have the same iteration order --- it will appear random at first
glance.  For the WB collections, it's determined by their comparison function.  The default
comparison function, @code{compare}, imposes an ordering that's designed more for performance than
for usefulness to clients, but you can @href{Custom Comparison and Hash Functions, override} it.
Also, there are @href{Replay Sets and Maps, ``replay'' collections} that keep track of the order in
which elements or keys were added, and use that order for iteration.  In any case, all of the
different ways to iterate over a given collection will use the same ordering.

If performance is a concern, the procedural macros are the fastest way, but they can't always be
used (for example, you can't use two instances of them to iterate over two collections in parallel).
The stateful iterators are the next fastest; the functional iterators are third.  All of these take
amortized constant time per element.  GMap uses the procedural iterators when possible, else the
stateful iterators, so for the cases that fit naturally into its structure, you won't be able to
improve on it by writing the iteration some other way.  Iterate uses the stateful iterators.

@hrule{}

@c ================================================================================
@node Procedural Iteration Macros
@section Procedural Iteration Macros

The macros @href{Macro do-set, @code{do-set}}, @href{Macro do-map, @code{do-map}}, @href{Macro
do-bag, @code{do-bag}}, @href{Macro do-bag-pairs, @code{do-bag-pairs}}, @href{Macro do-seq,
@code{do-seq}}, and @href{Macro do-2-relation, do-2-relation} are just like Common Lisp's
@code{dolist}: they iterate in a procedural style, binding one or two variables to the elements or
pairs of the collection and executing the body.  Optionally, an expression can be supplied for the
value of the entire form; otherwise, they return @code{nil}.

@c ================================================================================
@node Stateful Iterators
@section Stateful Iterators

FSet's stateful iterators are objects implemented as closures; you invoke operations on them with
@code{funcall}, passing a keyword symbol to specify the operation.  They are stateful in that each
@code{:get} call advances the iterator, so the next call will return the next element; in this, they
behave like streams.  To obtain a stateful iterator, call @code{iterator} on the collection.  The
operations on them are:

@itemize
@item @code{:get} returns the next element or pair of the collection, if any
@item @code{:more?} returns true if there are more elements remaining
@item @code{:done?} returns true if there are @emph{not} more elements remaining (for convenience)
@end itemize

Specifically, on a set iterator or a non-pair bag iterator, @code{:get} returns two values.  If the
iterator is not exhausted (there are more elements remaining), it returns the next element and a
true second value; if it is exhausted, it returns @code{nil} and false.  On a map iterator, a pair
bag iterator, or a 2-relation iterator, it returns three values: if not exhausted, the domain
element, the range element or multiplicity, and true; if exhausted, two @code{nil}s and false.

So there are actually three ways to detect exhaustion: @code{:more?} or @code{:done?}, which return
booleans with opposite senses, or just call @code{:get} until the second or third value is false.
Use whichever is most convenient.

FSet provides stateful iterators on these classes: @href{Method iterator (set), @code{set}},
@href{Method iterator (map), @code{map}}, @href{Method iterator (bag), @code{bag}}, @href{Method
iterator (seq), @code{seq}}, @href{Method iterator (replay-set), @code{replay-set}}, @href{Method
iterator (replay-map), @code{replay-map}}, and @href{Method iterator (2-relation),
@code{2-relation}}.  For convenience, it also provides @code{iterator} methods on these CL builtin
types: @code{list}, @code{vector}, @code{string}, and @code{sequence}.

The stateful iterators are not thread-safe.

@c ================================================================================
@node Functional Iterators
@section Functional Iterators

Where using a stateful iterator is like reading from a stream --- you just issue @code{:get} calls
to read the successive elements --- using a functional iterator is like walking down a list: there's
a @code{:first} operation which is like @code{car}, and a @code{:rest} operation which is like
@code{cdr}.  You have to use @code{:rest} explicitly at each step to get the next instance of the
iterator, just as you would have to use @code{cdr} to get the next cons of the list.  And as with
lists, the functional iterators are persistent: calling @code{:rest} on an iterator instance doesn't
invalidate it; you can stash it away, so you can restart the iteration at that point anytime.

FSet's functional iterators are not quite as efficient as the stateful ones, since each @code{:rest}
operation has to cons a new instance, so they're not used by default.  But they have occasional uses;
for instance, in parsing, when you want to be able to backtrack easily.  Also, they're thread-safe.

To obtain a functional iterator, call @code{fun-iterator} on the collection.  Functional iterators
are also implemented as closures, with these operations:

@itemize
@item @code{:first} returns the element or pair addressed by this iterator instance
@item @code{:rest} returns the next iterator instance
@item @code{:more?} returns true if there are more elements remaining
@item @code{:empty?} returns true if there are no more elements remaining
@end itemize

Specifically, on a set iterator or a non-pair bag iterator, @code{:first} returns two values.  If
the iterator is not exhausted (there are more elements remaining), it returns the next element and a
true second value; if it is exhausted, it returns @code{nil} and false.  On a map iterator, a pair
bag iterator, or a binary relation iterator, it returns three values: if not exhausted, the domain
element, the range element or multiplicity, and true; if exhausted, two @code{nil}s and false.

So there are actually three ways to detect exhaustion: @code{:more?} or @code{:empty?}, which return
booleans with opposite senses, or just call @code{:first} until the second or third value is false.
Use whichever is most convenient.

FSet provides functional iterators on these classes: @href{Method fun-iterator (set), @code{set}},
@href{Method fun-iterator (map), @code{map}}, @href{Method fun-iterator (bag), @code{bag}},
@href{Method fun-iterator (seq), @code{seq}}, @href{Method fun-iterator (replay-set),
@code{replay-set}}, @href{Method fun-iterator (replay-map), @code{replay-map}}, and @href{Method
fun-iterator (2-relation), @code{2-relation}}.  For convenience, it also provides
@code{fun-iterator} methods on these CL builtin types: @code{list}, @code{vector}, @code{string},
and @code{sequence}.

@c ================================================================================
@node The @code{at-index} Operation
@section The @code{at-index} Operation

FSet collections provide an @code{at-index} operation that returns the element or pair at the
supplied index, which must be in [0 .. size).  This operation takes O(log @i{n}) time, so using it
repeatedly is not the most efficient way to iterate the whole collection, but if you need to be able
to back up or skip forward arbitrarily, it will be the most convenient.

@c ================================================================================
@node GMap
@section GMap

GMap is an iteration macro for Common Lisp.  It was conceived as a generalization of @code{mapcar}
(hence the name).  It is intended for cases when @code{mapcar} doesn't suffice because the things
you want to map over aren't in lists, or you need to collect the results of the mapping into
something other than a list.

That is, @code{gmap} is probably the right thing to use when you are using iteration to perform the
same computation on each element of some collection, as opposed to changing your state in some
complicated way on every iteration of a loop.  It's conceptually reasonable to imagine all the
iterations of a @code{gmap} as happening in parallel, just as you might with @code{mapcar}.  It also
supports arbitrary reductions of the results of the mapped function; more on this below.

GMap is explicitly intended only for iterations that fit this "map-reduce" model.  It is not trying
to be a "universal" iteration construct.  People have asked me what guarantees it offers concerning
the ordering of the various operations it performs, and the answer is none, other than those
obviously imposed by the data flow (a result can't be used until it is computed).  I think that the
question was rooted in experience of people using @code{loop} or other iteration constructs and
supplying variable update expressions with side effects, so that there was "crosswise" data flow
between the iterations.  I strongly advise that such side effects be avoided in @code{gmap} calls.
If you find yourself wanting to use them, either there is a better way, or else @code{gmap} simply
isn't the right tool for the job.  In short, you should think of @code{gmap} very much as a
@emph{functional} iteration construct.

In general, my philosophy about iteration in Lisp is that there are many ways to do it, for the very
good reason that there are many kinds of iterations, and one should use the tool appropriate for the
particular case one is confronted with.  So, for example, I almost never write a @code{gmap} form
with side effects.  If I'm just iterating over a list for effect, I'll use @code{dolist}.  For
iterations with cross-iteration data flow ("loop-carried dependences" is the compiler developer's
term) or where the iteration space is not well defined in advance, I might use good old @code{do},
or I might even write the code tail-recursively, counting on the fact that most CL implementations
these days do tail-call optimization at least on local calls (calls to functions defined by
@code{labels} or @code{flet}).

So when I do use @code{gmap}, it's specifically intended to convey to someone reading the code that
the iterations are independent --- either the function being mapped is side-effect-free, or at the
very least, the argument generators and result collectors are mutually independent.  I strongly urge
adherence to this rule, whose meaning will become clearer as we proceed.

Even with that constraint, I find that occasions to use @code{gmap} are not at all uncommon.  It has
proven handy over the years, and FSet makes substantial internal use of it.

Common Lisp has @code{cl:map}, which already generalizes @code{mapcar} somewhat: it accepts vectors
as well as lists, and takes a type specifier to control the type of the result collection, in case
you want to construct a vector or string.  (I'm using an explicit @code{cl:} prefix on @code{map} to
avoid confusion with FSet's @code{map}.)  GMap takes this idea even further by adding a little
syntax, to make the argument generators and result collectors extensible.  For example, these three
expressions are equivalent:

@example
(mapcar #'foo this-list that-list)
(cl:map 'list #'foo this-list that-list)
(gmap (:result list) #'foo (:arg list this-list) (:arg list that-list))
@end example

But along with being able to generate arguments (for the function being mapped; @code{#'foo} in this
example) from lists or vectors, GMap has many other argument generators, e.g., @code{index} for an
integer subrange; @code{hash-table} for the pairs of a hash table; or @code{file-chars} or
@code{file-lines} for the contents of a file.  Similarly, GMap has more result collector types,
e.g., @code{and} (provides the functionality of @code{cl:every}), @code{or} (ditto for
@code{cl:some}), @code{sum}, @code{max}/@code{min}, etc.

FSet builds on these by adding argument generators and result collectors for its collections.  (GMap
predated FSet and can be used without it; I will list the ``base'' GMap features separately from
those added by FSet.)

Like @code{mapcar}, @code{gmap} accepts any number of argument clauses; the iterations they specify
occur in parallel, and the iteration terminates when any of them is exhausted.

GMap makes use of multiple values: some argument types generate two arguments for each call to the
function being mapped instead of one, and some result types expect the function being mapped to
return two values.  For example, this expression converts a plist @var{pl} to an alist:

@example
(gmap (:result list) #'cons (:arg plist @var{pl}))
@end example

This one converts it to a hash table:

@example
(gmap (:result hash-table) #'values (:arg plist @var{pl}))
@end example

The @code{:arg plist} clause emits the pairs of the plist; they become two arguments to the function
being mapped.  In the first case, this is @code{cons}, and a list is formed of the resulting conses.
In the second case, @code{values} reflects the two arguments back as two values, and then the
@code{:result hash-table} clause takes those pairs and inserts them into a hash table.

(GMap takes the view that consing up a collection of function results is a kind of reduction --- a
slightly unusual view, perhaps, but not unreasonable.  So it treats collecting the results into a
list, for example, as an instance of the same pattern as, say, summing them.)

If you just want to pass the argument(s) to the result collector, there are a few ways to say this
(too many, arguably).  The above example uses @code{#'values}, which is general.  GMap will also
interpret the symbol @code{:id} as equivalent to @code{#'values}; you can also use @code{nil} for
this, though I wouldn't really recommend it --- it's rather cryptic.  Finally, if only one value is
involved, you can use @code{#'identity}.

To get the best performance out of your @code{gmap} forms, make the argument types as specific as
possible.  For instance, if you know the collection you want to iterate over is a CHAMP set, use
argument type @code{ch-set} rather than @code{set} or the very generic @code{sequence}.

GMap is extensible --- you can add your own argument and result types --- but I won't go into that
here; see the source.

In sum --- I know, there are other iteration macros out there that you're already familiar with; you
may be understandably unenthusiastic about learning another one.  It's certainly not
@emph{necessary} to use GMap along witih FSet.  But the two do fit together nicely, and GMap has a
simple and familiar conceptual model, as I've just explained.  I hope you'll give it a try.

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node GMap Base Argument Types
@subsection GMap Base Argument Types

These could have been called ``generators''.

@deffn {GMap arg type} constant value
Yields @var{value} on every iteration.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} list list
Yields successive elements of @var{list}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} improper-list list
Yields the successive elements of `list`, which may be improper; any non-cons tail terminates the
iteration.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} alist alist
Yields, as two values, the successive pairs of @var{alist}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} plist plist
Yields, as two values, the successive pairs of elements of @var{plist}; that is, there is one
iteration for each two elements.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} hash-table table
Yields, as two values, the successive pairs of @var{table}.  (Warning: the ordering of pairs is
Lisp-implementation-dependent and should not be relied on.)
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} tails list
Yields the successive tails (cdrs) of @var{list}, starting with @var{list} itself, which may be
improper.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} index @r{&optional} start stop @r{&key} incr @r{(@var{fixnums?} t)}
Yields integers in the interval [@var{start}, @var{stop}) if @var{incr} (which defaults to 1) is
positive; or in the interval [@var{stop}, @var{start}) if @var{incr} is negative.  Specifically, in
the upward case, the values begin with @var{start} and increase by @var{incr} until >= @var{stop};
in the downward case, the values begin with @var{start} - @var{incr} and decrease by @var{incr}
until < @var{stop}.  All values are assumed to be fixnums unless @var{fixnums?} is a literal
@code{nil}.  @var{stop} can be omitted or a literal @code{nil} to indicate an unbounded sequence.
@var{start} can be omitted to start at 0.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} index-inc start stop &key incr @r{(@var{fixnums?} t)}
("Index, INClusive") Yields integers in the interval [@var{start}, @var{stop}].  Specifically, in
the upward case (@var{incr} > 0), the values begin with @var{start} and increase by @var{incr} until
> @var{stop}; in the downward case, the values begin with @var{start} and decrease by @var{incr}
until < @var{stop}.  All values are assumed to be fixnums unless @var{fixnums?}  is a literal
@code{nil}.  @var{stop} can be a literal @code{nil} to indicate an unbounded sequence.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} exp initial-value base
Yields an exponential sequence whose first value is @var{initial-value}, and whose value is
multiplied by @var{base} on each iteration.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} vector vec @r{&key} start stop incr
Yields elements of vector @var{vec}.  @var{start} and @var{stop} may be supplied to select a
subsequence of @var{vec}; @var{incr} may be supplied (it must be positive) to select every second
element etc.  For performance, you may prefer @code{simple-vector}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} simple-vector vec @r{&key} start stop incr
Yields elements of vector @var{vec}, which is assumed to be simple, and whose size is assumed to be
a fixnum.  @var{start} and @var{stop} may be supplied to select a subsequence of @var{vec};
@var{incr} may be supplied (it must be positive) to select every second element etc.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} string str @r{&key} start stop incr
Yields elements of string @var{str}.  @var{start} and @var{stop} may be supplied to select a
subsequence of @var{vec}; @var{incr} may be supplied (it must be positive) to select every second
element etc.  For performance, you may prefer @var{simple-string}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} simple-string str @r{&key} start stop incr
Yields elements of string @var{str}, which is assumed to be simple, and whose size is assumed to be
a fixnum.  @var{start} and @var{stop} may be supplied to select a subsequence of @var{str};
@var{incr} may be supplied (it must be positive) to select every second element etc.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} array ary @r{&key} start stop incr
Yields elements of array @var{ary}, which may be multidimensional and/or specialized.  Access is via
@code{row-major-aref}, so the elements are yielded in row-major order.  @var{start} and @var{stop},
which are row-major indices, may be supplied to select a subsequence, and @var{incr} to skip one or
more elements at each step.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} file-chars pathname @r{&key} element-type external-format
Yields the characters of the file named by @var{pathname}.  @var{element-type} and
@var{external-format}, if supplied, are passed to @var{open}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} file-lines pathname @r{&key} skip-initial external-format
Yields the lines of the file named by @var{pathname}.  If @var{skip-initial} is given, it is the
number of initial lines to skip.  @var{external-format}, if supplied, is passed to @var{open}.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node GMap Base Result Types
@subsection GMap Base Result Types

@deffn {GMap result type} list @r{&key} filterp
Returns a list of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp} (which can be @code{:id} to
filter out @code{nil}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} alist @r{&key} filterp
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns an alist of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} plist @r{&key} filterp
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a plist of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} hash-table @r{&key} test size rehash-size rehash-threshold filterp
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a hash-table of the pairs.  If any of
@var{test}, @var{size}, @var{rehash-size}, or @var{rehash-threshold} are supplied, they are passed
to @code{make-hash-table}.  @var{filterp}, if supplied, must take two arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} append @r{&key} filterp
Returns the result of @code{append}ing the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp} (which can
be @code{:id} to filter out @code{nil}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} nconc @r{&key} filterp
Returns the result of @code{nconc}ing the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp} (which can be
@code{:id} to filter out @code{nil}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} and
If one of the values is false, terminates the iteration and returns false; otherwise returns the
last value.  Does not work as an operand of @code{values}.  (Generalizes @code{cl:every}.)
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} or
If one of the values is true, terminates the iteration and returns it; otherwise, returns false.
(Does not work as an operand of @code{values}.  (Generalizes @code{cl:some}.)
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} sum @r{&key} filterp
Returns the sum of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp} (which can be @code{:id} to
filter out @code{nil}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} product @r{&key} filterp
Returns the product of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp} (which can be @code{:id} to
filter out @code{nil}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} count
Returns the number of true values.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} max @r{&key} filterp key
Optionally filters the values by @var{filterp}, then returns the maximum, or if @var{key} is
supplied, the value with the maximum key (if that's not unique, returns the first one); or
@code{nil} if no values were supplied (or survived filtering).  Example:
@example
(gmap (:result max :key #'cdr) nil (:arg list alist))
@end example
returns the (first) pair of @var{alist} with the maximum @var{cdr}.

If @var{key} is @var{:second-value}, the second value of the mapped function is used; for example,
@example
(gmap (:result max :key :second-value) nil (:arg alist an-alist))
@end example
returns the (first) @var{car} of @var{an-alist} with the maximum corresponding @var{cdr}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} min @r{&key} filterp key
Optionally filters the values by @var{filterp}, then
returns the minimum, or if @var{key} is supplied, the value with the minimum key
(if that's not unique, returns the first one); or @code{nil} if no values were
supplied (or survived filtering).  Example:
@example
(gmap (:result min :key #'cdr) nil (:arg list alist))
@end example
returns the (first) pair of @var{alist} with the minimum @code{cdr}.

If @var{key} is @var{:second-value}, the second value of the mapped function is used; for example,
@example
(gmap (:result min :key :second-value) nil (:arg alist an-alist))
@end example
returns the (first) @var{car} of @var{an-alist} with the minimum corresponding @code{cdr}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} vector @r{&key} use-vector length fill-pointer adjustable filterp
Constructs a vector containing the results.  If @var{use-vector} is supplied, the argument will be
filled with the results and returned; if @var{fill-pointer} is true and @var{adjustable} is true, it
must have a fill pointer and be adjustable, and values will be appended to it with
@code{vector-push-extend}; if @var{fill-pointer} is true and @var{adjustable} is false, it must have
a fill pointer, and values will be appended to it with @code{vector-push}; otherwise, the vector is
assumed to be simple and must be large enough to hold the results.  (Recall that @code{vector-push}
has no effect if the vector is full.)

If @var{use-vector} is not supplied, a vector will be constructed and returned; if @var{length} is
supplied, returns a simple vector of the specified length (which must be sufficient to hold the
results); otherwise, returns a simple vector of the correct length (but to do this, it must cons a
temporary list).

In any case, if @var{filterp} is supplied, it is a predicate of one argument, the value of the
function being mapped, that says whether to include it in the result (@var{filterp} can be
@code{:id} to filter out @code{nil}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} string @r{&key} use-string length fill-pointer adjustable filterp
Constructs a string containing the results.  If @var{use-string} is supplied, the argument will be
filled with the results and returned; if @var{fill-pointer} is true and @var{adjustable} is true, it
must have a fill pointer and be adjustable, and values will be appended to it with
@var{vector-push-extend}; if @var{fill-pointer} is true and @var{adjustable} is false, it must have
a fill pointer, and values will be appended to it with @var{vector-push}; otherwise, the vector is
assumed to be simple and must be large enough to hold the results.  (Recall that @var{vector-push}
has no effect if the vector is full.)

If @var{use-string} is not supplied, a string will be constructed and returned; if @var{length} is
supplied, returns a simple string of the specified length (which must be sufficient to hold the
results); otherwise, returns a simple string of the correct length (but to do this, it must cons a
temporary list).

In any case, if @var{filterp} is supplied, it is a predicate of one argument, the value of the
function being mapped, that says whether to include it in the result (@var{filterp} can be
@code{:id} to filter out @code{nil}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} array dims @r{&key} element-type initial-element filterp
Constructs an array containing the results.  Passes @var{dims}, and @var{element-type} and
@var{initial-element} if supplied, to @code{make-array}.  If the array is multidimensional, fills it
in row-major order.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node GMap FSet Argument Types
@subsection GMap FSet Argument Types

Many of these come in both generic (@code{set}, @code{bag}, etc.) and implementation-specific
(@code{ch-set}, @code{wb-set}, etc.) flavors.  In the past, there were performance reasons to prefer
the specific ones when the implementation were known, but that is mostly no longer the case.  The one
situation in which you might notice a difference is when doing parallel iteration over two or more
collections; even then, the difference will be small.  So I recommend sticking with the generic
ones; I have documented the specific ones here just for completeness.

@deffn {GMap arg type} sequence seq
Yields the elements of @var{seq}, which can be of any CL sequence type as well as an FSet seq, or a
set or bag as well --- any type for which @href{Stateful Iterators, @code{iterator}} has a method.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} iterator it
Yields the values returned by @var{it}, which must be an FSet @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful
iterator}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} fun-sequence @ @r{&key} from-end?
Yields the elements of @var{fun-iterable}, which can be an FSet seq, set, or bag.  If
@var{:from-end?} is true, iterates in reverse order.  (Uses a @href{Functional Iterators, functional
iterator}.  There's no reason to use this unless you want the @var{from-end?} behavior.)
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} set s
@deffnx {GMap arg type} ch-set s
@deffnx {GMap arg type} wb-set s
Yields the elements of @var{s}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} fun-set s @r{&key} from-end?
Yields the elements of @var{s}.  (Uses a @href{Functional Iterators, functional iterator}.  There's
no reason to use this unless you want the @var{from-end?} behavior.)
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} map m
@deffnx {GMap arg type} ch-map m
@deffnx {GMap arg type} wb-map m
Yields each pair of @var{m} as two values.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} fun-map m @r{&key} from-end?
Yields the pairs of @var{m} as two values.  (Uses a @href{Functional Iterators, functional
iterator}.  There's no reason to use this unless you want the @var{from-end?} behavior.)
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} bag b
@deffnx {GMap arg type} ch-bag b
@deffnx {GMap arg type} wb-bag b
Yields each element of @var{b} repeatedly, as many times as its multiplicity.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} bag-pairs b
@deffnx {GMap arg type} ch-bag-pairs b
@deffnx {GMap arg type} wb-bag-pairs b
Yields each element of @var{b} and its multiplicity as two values.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} seq @ @r{&key} start end from-end?
@deffnx {GMap arg type} wb-seq @ @r{&key} start end from-end?
Yields the elements of @var{seq}.  The keyword parameters @var{start} and @var{end} can be supplied
to restrict the range of the iteration; @var{start} is inclusive and defaults to 0, while @var{end}
is exclusive and defaults to the size of the seq.  If @var{from-end?} is true, the elements will be
yielded in reverse order.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} tuple tpl
@deffnx {GMap arg type} dyn-tuple tpl
Yields each pair of @var{tpl}, as two values.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} replay-set s
@deffnx {GMap arg type} ch-replay-set s
@deffnx {GMap arg type} wb-replay-set s
Yields the elements of @var{s}.  As always, the iteration is in replay order.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} replay-map m
@deffnx {GMap arg type} ch-replay-map m
@deffnx {GMap arg type} wb-replay-map m
Yields the pairs of @var{m} as two values.  As always, the iteration is in replay order.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap arg type} 2-relation r
@deffnx {GMap arg type} ch-2-relation r
@deffnx {GMap arg type} wb-2-relation r
Yields each pair of @var{r} as two values.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node GMap FSet Result Types
@subsection GMap FSet Result Types

@deffn {GMap result type} set @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns a CHAMP set of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} ch-set @ @r{&key} filterp compare-fn-name
Returns a CHAMP set of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.  @var{compare-fn-name} can
be supplied to specify a custom organization.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} wb-set @ @r{&key} filterp compare-fn-name
Returns a WB-set of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.  @var{compare-fn-name} can be
supplied to specify a custom ordering.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} union @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns the union of the sets (or bags), optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} intersection @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns the intersection of the sets (or bags), optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.  (If zero sets
are supplied, returns the full set; see @href{Function full-set, @code{full-set}}.)
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} map @ @r{&key} filter @r{(}default @r{@code{nil})} no-default?
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a CHAMP map of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.  If @var{default} is supplied, that will be the map's @href{Map
and Seq Defaults, default}; if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no default.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} ch-map @ @r{&key} filter @r{(@var{default} @code{nil})} no-default? key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a CHAMP map of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.  @var{default} will be the map's @href{Map and Seq Defaults,
default}; but if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no default.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and
@var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols naming the comparison functions to be used
for keys and values respectively (these default to @code{compare}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} wb-map @ @r{&key} filter @r{(@var{default} @code{nil})} no-default? key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a CHAMP map of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.  @var{default} will be the map's @href{Map and Seq Defaults,
default}; but if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no default.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and
@var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols naming the comparison functions to be used
for keys and values respectively (these default to @code{compare}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} map-union @r{&key @var{val-fn} (@var{default} @code{nil})} filterp
Returns the @href{Method map-union (map map), map-union} of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.  If
@var{val-fn} is supplied, it is passed to @code{map-union}.  @var{default} will be the map's
@href{Map and Seq Defaults, default}; but if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no
default.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} map-intersection @r{&key @var{val-fn} (@var{default} @code{nil})} filterp
Returns the @href{Method map-intersection (map map), map-intersection} of the values, optionally filtered by
@var{filterp}.  If @var{val-fn} is supplied, it is passed to @code{map-intersection}.  @var{default}
will be the map's @href{Map and Seq Defaults, default}; but if @var{no-default?} is true, the map
will have no default.  If zero maps are intersected, returns @code{nil} (there's no identity value
for this operation).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} map-to-sets @ @r{&key} filterp key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Consumes two values from the mapped function.  Returns a map from the first values, with each one
mapped to a set of the corresponding second values.  If you supply @var{val-compare-fn-name}, to
customize the organization of the range sets, the returned map will use @code{eql-compare} as its
@var{val-compare-fn}.  Also, @var{filterp}, if supplied, must take two arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} bag @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns a CHAMP bag of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} ch-bag @ @r{&key} filterp compare-fn-name
Returns a CHAMP bag of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.  @var{compare-fn-name} can
be supplied to specify a custom organization.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} wb-bag @ @r{&key} filterp compare-fn-name
Returns a WB-bag of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.  @var{compare-fn-name} can be
supplied to specify a custom ordering.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} bag-pairs @ @r{&key} filterp
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a bag of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} ch-bag-pairs @ @r{&key} filterp compare-fn-name
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a CHAMP bag of the pairs, optionally filtered
by @var{filterp}.  @var{filterp}, if supplied, must take two arguments.  @var{compare-fn-name} can
be supplied to specify a custom organization.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} wb-bag-pairs @ @r{&key} filterp compare-fn-name
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a WB-bag of the values, optionally filtered by
@var{filterp}.  @var{filterp}, if supplied, must take two arguments.  @var{compare-fn-name} can be
supplied to specify a custom ordering.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} bag-sum @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns the bag-sum of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} bag-product @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns the bag-product of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.  (If zero bags are
supplied, returns the full set, which contains every value with multiplicity 1; see @href{Function
full-set, @code{full-set}}.)
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} seq @ @r{&key} filterp
@deffnx {GMap result type} wb-seq @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns a seq of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} concat @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns the concatenation of the seq values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} tuple @ @r{&key} filterp
@deffnx {GMap result type} dyn-tuple @ @r{&key} filterp
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a dynamic tuple of the pairs.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} replay-set @ @r{&key} filterp
Returns a CHAMP replay-set of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} ch-replay-set @ @r{&key} filterp compare-fn-name
Returns a CHAMP replay-set of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@var{compare-fn-name} can be supplied to specify a custom organization.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} wb-replay-set @ @r{&key} filterp compare-fn-name
Returns a WB-tree replay-set of the values, optionally filtered by @var{filterp}.
@var{compare-fn-name} can be supplied to specify a custom ordering.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} replay-map @ @r{&key} filter @r{@var{default} @code{nil})} no-default? key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a CHAMP map of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.  If @var{default} is supplied, that will be the map's @href{Map
and Seq Defaults, default}; if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no default.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} ch-replay-map @ @r{&key} filter @r{@var{default} @code{nil})} no-default?
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a CHAMP map of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.  If @var{default} is supplied, that will be the map's @href{Map
and Seq Defaults, default}; if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no default.
@var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols naming the
comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (these default to @code{compare}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} wb-replay-map @ @r{&key} filter @r{@var{default} @code{nil})} no-default?
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a WB-tree map of the pairs.  @var{filterp}, if
supplied, must take two arguments.  If @var{default} is supplied, that will be the map's @href{Map
and Seq Defaults, default}; if @var{no-default?} is true, the map will have no default.
@var{key-compare-fn-name} and @var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols naming the
comparison functions to be used for keys and values respectively (these default to @code{compare}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} 2-relation @ @r{&key} filterp
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a CHAMP binary relation of the pairs.
@var{filterp}, if supplied, must take two arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} ch-2-relation @ @r{&key} filterp key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a CHAMP binary relation of the pairs.
@var{filterp}, if supplied, must take two arguments.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and
@var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols naming the comparison functions to be used
for keys and values respectively (these default to @code{compare}).
@end deffn

@deffn {GMap result type} wb-2-relation @ @r{&key} filterp key-compare-fn-name val-compare-fn-name
Consumes two values from the mapped function; returns a WB-tree binary relation of the pairs.
@var{filterp}, if supplied, must take two arguments.  @var{key-compare-fn-name} and
@var{val-compare-fn-name}, if supplied, must be symbols naming the comparison functions to be used
for keys and values respectively (these default to @code{compare}).
@end deffn


@c ================================================================================
@node Iterate
@section Iterate

Iterate support is provided by a separate ASDF system, FSet/Iterate, so as not to pull in Iterate as
a dependency if you're not using it.  To load it, do @code{(ql:quickload "fset/iterate")}.

There are two symbol collisions between packages @code{fset/iterate} and @code{iterate} that you
will need to deal with.  One is relatively straightforward: @code{fset/iterate} exports a different
version of @code{unioning}; see the description below.

The other has to do with the symbol @code{with}.  Astonishingly, though both FSet and Iterate export
a symbol @code{with}, they do not conflict in practice.  Iterate doesn't fdefine @code{with}, but
uses it as a clause head, part of its syntax.  Since it would never make sense to call
@code{fset:with} without doing something with its return value, an @code{fset:with} call will never
appear at top level within the body of an @code{iter} form, so @code{iter} could never mistake it
for a clause head.  That means you actually can write something like this:

@example
    (iter ... (with foo = (with some-set new-element)) ... )
@end example

although, to keep your fellow developers' heads from exploding, you might be better advised to
package-qualify the two occurrences of @code{with}.

[But see @uref{https://gitlab.common-lisp.net/iterate/iterate/-/issues/27, this Iterate issue}.  As
of this writing, reloading Iterate could make this stop working; also, that page has an Iterate
patch you might need for it to work in all cases.]

With that in mind, I recommend adding the following to any packages in which you want to use FSet's
Iterate support:

@example
  (:shadowing-import-from :fset2 #:with)
  (:shadowing-import-from :fset/iterate #:unioning)
@end example

Here are the clauses and accumulators defined by FSet/Iterate:

@deffn {Iterate clause} {for @var{var} in-set @var{set}}
Yields the elements of @var{set}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate clause} {for @var{var} in-bag @var{bag}}
Yields the elements of @var{bag}.  Elements with multiplicities greater than 1 will be repeated that
many times.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate clause} {for (@var{var} @var{count}) in-bag @var{bag}}
Yields the pairs of @var{bag}, binding @var{var} to each element and @var{count} to its
multiplicity.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate clause} {for (@var{key} @var{value}) in-map @var{map}}
Yields the pairs of @var{map}, binding @var{key} to each key and @var{value} to its value.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate clause} {for @var{var} in-seq @var{seq}} @ @r{&optional} @r{from} from @r{upfrom} upfrom @
        @r{downfrom} downfrom @r{to} to @r{downto} downto @r{above} above @r{below} below @
        @r{by} step @r{with-index} with-index
Yields the elements of @var{seq}.  The index range can be specified with @var{from}/@var{uptrom} or
@var{downfrom}, and/or @var{to}, @var{downto}, @var{above}, or @var{below}.  @var{step}, if
supplied, gives the index step.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate clause} {for @var{var} in-collection @var{coll}}
Yields the elements of @var{coll}, which can be any collection which has an @code{iterator} method
conforming to the FSet @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful iterator protocol}.
@end deffn

FSet's Iterate support also includes several accumulators for constructing new collections:

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {collect-set @var{expr}} @ @r{&optional initial-value} init-val @r{into} var-spec
Collects values into a set.  By default, this is a @code{ch-set} organized by @code{compare}; supply
@var{init-val} to construct a different kind of set.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {collect-bag @var{expr}} @ @r{&optional initial-value} init-val @r{into} var-spec
Collects values into a bag.  By default, this is a @code{ch-bag} organized by @code{compare}; supply
@var{init-val} to construct a different kind of bag.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {collect-bag @var{expr} count @var{count-expr}} @ @r{&optional initial-value} init-val @r{into} var-spec
Collects value/count pairs into a bag; that is, on each execution, adds @var{count-expr} instances
of @var{expr} to the bag.  By default, this is a @code{ch-bag} organized by @code{compare}; supply
@var{init-val} to construct a different kind of bag.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {collect-seq @var{expr}} @ @r{&optional into} var-spec
Collects values into a seq.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {collect-map (@var{key} @var{value})} @ @r{&optional initial-value} init-val @r{into} var-spec
Collects key/value pairs into a map.  By default, this is a @code{ch-map} organized by
@code{compare}; supply @var{init-val} to construct a different kind of map.  If a key is supplied
more than once, the @emph{last} value supplied for it is retained.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {collect-map-to-sets (@var{key} @var{value})} @ @r{&optional initial-value} init-val @r{into} var-spec
Collects key/value pairs into a map, collecting the values supplied for each key into a set; that
is, the result is a map whose range values are sets.  By default, the map is a @code{ch-map}
organized by @code{compare}, and the sets are @code{ch-set}s organized by @code{compare}; supply
@var{init-val} to construct a different kind of map (the map's default must be a set).
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {unioning @var{expr}} @ @r{&optional initial-value} init-val @r{into} var-spec
Unions sets into a result set.  If @var{init-val} is provided, the result will be of the same type
and organization; otherwise, it will be of the same type and organization as the first set received,
unless the iteration terminates without executing this clause at all, in which case the result will
be the empty @code{ch-set}.

(My recommendation is for @code{fset/iterate:unioning} to shadow @code{iter:unioning} as described
above; but it's up to you whether to accept it.  Since you're using FSet, you probably want to avoid
unioning lists, which takes quadratic time.  However, FSet's version doesn't support the @code{at}
keyword, nor does it normally offer the ordering guarantee that @code{iter:unioning} does, although
you can get that effect by supplying @code{initial-value (replay-set)} and binding @code{expr} to
replay sets.)
@end deffn
@c Mention bags?  The doc string does, but this operation on bags doesn't seem that likely to be
@c useful.  @code{bag-summing} would be likelier; I guess I should write it.

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {intersecting @var{expr}} @ @r{&optional initial-value} init-val @r{into} var-spec
Intersects sets into a result set.  If @var{init-val} is provided, the result will be of the same
type and organization; otherwise, it will be of the same type and organization as the first set
received, unless the iteration terminates without executing this clause at all, in which case the
result will be the @href{Function full-set, full set} built on @code{ch-set}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {concating @var{expr}} @ @r{&optional into} var-spec
Concatenates successive seqs into a result seq.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {map-unioning @var{expr}} @ @r{&optional combining-with} val-fn @r{initial-value} init-val @r{into} var-spec
Map-unions maps into a result map (@pxref{Method map-union (map map)}).  If @var{val-fn} is
provided, it is used to combine values corresponding to the same key; the default is to overwrite
the value from the earlier map with the later value.  If @var{init-val} is provided, the result will
be of the same type and organization; otherwise, it will be of the same type and organization as the
first set received, unless the iteration terminates without executing this clause at all, in which
case the result will be the empty @code{ch-map}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Iterate accumulator} {map-intersecting @var{expr}} @ @r{&optional combining-with} val-fn @r{into} var-spec
Map-intersects maps into a result map (@pxref{Method map-intersection (map map)}).  If @var{val-fn}
is provided, it is used to combine values corresponding to the same key; the default is to overwrite
the value from the earlier map with the later value.  The result will be of the same type and
organization as the first set received, unless the iteration terminates without executing this
clause at all, in which case the result will be @code{nil}.

[Discussion: in the case of intersecting zero maps, there's nothing reasonable this could return,
since there's no such thing as a ``full map''.  (There is a full binary relation, but it's not a
function.)  So it may as well just return @code{nil}.  For the same reason, there's no point in it
accepting an initial value; if you want to change organizations, just @code{convert} the result.]
@end deffn
