@node Printing and Reading
@chapter Printing and Reading

This chapter covers the printed representations of FSet collections, and two slightly different sets
of reader macros that allow collection expressions to be written in a similar notation in your
source code.

This table summarizes the printed representations of the persistent FSet types.

@anchor{Print syntax table}
@multitable @columnfractions .15 .75 .1
@item @b{type} @tab @b{printed form} @tab @b{notes}
@item @href{Type wb-set, wb-set} @tab @code{#@{ @i{e0} @i{e1} @dots{} @}[@i{compare-fn}]} @tab 1, 3
@item @href{Type ch-set, ch-set} @tab @code{##@{ @i{e0} @i{e1} @dots{} @}[@i{compare-fn}]} @tab 2, 3
@item @href{Type complement-set, complement-set} @tab @code{~@i{set}} @tab 4
@item @href{Type wb-map, wb-map} @tab @code{#@{| (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1})
@dots{} |@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]/@i{default}} @tab 1, 5, 6
@item @href{Type ch-map, ch-map} @tab @code{##@{| (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1})
@dots{} |@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]/@i{default}} @tab 2, 5, 6
@item @href{Type wb-bag, wb-bag} @tab @code{#@{% @i{e0} #%(@i{e1 m1}) @dots{} %@}[@i{compare-fn}]} @tab 1, 3
@item @href{Type ch-bag, ch-bag} @tab @code{##@{% @i{e0} #%(@i{e1 m1}) @dots{} %@}[@i{compare-fn}]} @tab 2, 3
@item @href{Type wb-seq, wb-seq} @tab @code{#[ @i{e0 e1} @dots{} ]/@i{default}} @tab 6, 7
@item @href{Type ch-replay-set, ch-replay-set} @tab @code{##@{= @i{e0} @i{e1} @dots{} @}[@i{compare-fn}]} @tab 2, 3
@item @href{Type ch-replay-map, ch-replay-map} @tab @code{##@{=| (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1})
@dots{} |@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]/@i{default}} @tab 2, 5, 6
@item @href{Type ch-2-relation, ch-2-relation} @tab @code{##@{+ (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1})
@dots{} +@}[@i{key-compare-fn};@i{val-compare-fn}]} @tab 2, 5
@item @href{Type dyn-tuple, dyn-tuple} @tab @code{#~< (@i{k0 v0}) (@i{k1 v1}) @dots{} >} @tab
@end multitable

Notes:

@enumerate
@item @ilc{1}
The single @code{#} indicates WB.
@item @ilc{2}
The double @code{#} indicates CHAMP.
@item @ilc{3}
The comparison function and its containing brackets are printed only if it is not @code{compare}.
@item @ilc{4}
That is, a tilde followed by the printed representation of the complemented set.
@item @ilc{5}
The comparison functions are printed only if they are not @code{compare}.  If both of them are
@code{compare}, the brackets are also omitted.
@item @ilc{6}
The default, and the leading slash marking it, are printed only if it is not @code{nil}; if the
collection has no default, @code{/[no default]} is printed.
@item @ilc{7}
Char seqs --- seqs containing only characters --- are printed as strings preceded by @code{#},
possibly also suffixed with a slash and default, or @code{/[no default]}.  Within a non-char seq,
runs of consecutive characters are printed as @code{#$} followed by the characters as a string.
@end enumerate

@hrule{}


@c ================================================================================
@node Reader Macros
@section Reader Macros

FSet supplies reader macros so that collection expressions can be written in source code in syntax
similar to that in which they are printed.  I first wrote these years ago, thinking that I wanted to
use them, but I never have; as things have turned out, I prefer simply calling the constructor
macros, which are in ordinary, parenthesized Lisp syntax.  (Here are the constructor macros, for
reference: @href{Macro set, @code{set}}, @href{Macro ch-set, @code{ch-set}}, @href{Macro wb-set,
@code{wb-set}}, @href{Macro map, @code{map}}, @href{Macro ch-map, @code{ch-map}}, @href{Macro
wb-map, @code{wb-map}}, @href{Macro bag, @code{bag}}, @href{Macro ch-bag, @code{ch-bag}},
@href{Macro wb-bag, @code{wb-bag}}, @href{Macro seq, @code{seq}}, @href{Macro replay-set,
@code{replay-set}}, @href{Macro replay-map, @code{replay-map}}, @href{Macro 2-relation,
@code{2-relation}}, @href{Macro ch-2-relation, @code{ch-2-relation}}, and @href{Macro wb-2-relation,
@code{wb-2-relation}}.)

The reader macros come in two flavors, which I'll call the ``constructor'' type and the
``rereading'' type.  The ``constructor'' reader macros expand to calls to the constructor macros.
This means that symbols and lists within them will be evaluated.  I think this is probably the
behavior that will be most often desired when writing code, but it means that printing an FSet
collection and then reading it back is unlikely to have the desired effect, unless all of the
elements of the collection are self-evaluating in Common Lisp: numbers, strings, and keyword
symbols.

The ``rereading'' reader macros are provided to handle the case where you want round-trip
equivalence, so you can read a printed structure containing FSet collections, and get a structure
@code{equal?} to the one you started with.

There are three ways to use the reader macros.  The recommended way is using
@uref{https://github.com/melisgl/named-readtables, Named-Readtables}:

@example
(named-readtables:in-readtable fset2:fset-readtable)
;; or
(named-readtables:in-readtable fset2:fset-rereading-readtable)
@end example

If you wish to make further customizations, and you're using Named-Readtables, the recommended
approach is to supply one of these names in the @code{:merge} clause of a
@code{named-readtables:defreadtable} form.

If you don't want to use Named-Readtables, there are two other ways.  You can set or bind
@code{*readtable*} to either @code{*fset-readtable*} or @code{*fset-rereading-readtable*}.  Or, if
you have an existing, customized readtable that you want to add FSet reader macros to, call
@code{fset-setup-readtable} or @code{fset-setup-rereading-readtable} on it.

The syntax accepted by the rereading reader macros is, naturally, the same as that produced by
printing; see the @href{Print syntax table, table above}.  The syntax accepted by the constructor
reading macros is very similar, except that (as of this writing) they do not accept comparison
functions or defaults.  They also accept the syntax @code{#$@var{expr}}; it reads as @code{($
@var{expr})}, which is interpreted by the constructor macros as a union or splice, that treats the
value of @var{expr} as a sub-collection of the same kind and uses its elements or pairs.


@c ================================================================================
@node JSON Printing and Parsing
@section JSON Printing and Parsing

FSet supports JSON printing and parsing by extending the existing
@uref{https://github.com/Zulu-Inuoe/jzon, Jzon} library.  The support is in a separate system,
FSet/Jzon, to avoid adding a dependency if you're not using it; to load it, do @code{ql:quickload
"fset/jzon"}.

FSet/Jzon parses JSON into FSet collections --- JSON arrays parse into FSet seqs, and by default,
JSON objects parse into FSet replay maps --- and can also print these in JSON format.  Two other
FSet representations for JSON objects are also available: plain maps and dynamic tuples.

A potential problem area has to do with the treatment of null, empty, and false values.  On the one
hand, JSON distinguishes these, as @code{null}, @code{[]}, and @code{false} respectively.  On the
other, in Common Lisp, @code{nil} is often used for all three: a missing value, an empty list, or a
false boolean value.  What to do about this depends on whether you're using a map representation for
JSON objects or a tuple representation.  The reason this matters is that in the tuple case,
slot-specific type information can be supplied to tell Jzon what to do; in the map case, it cannot.

@itemize
@item
With the map representation, @code{null} will parse as @code{cl:null}, @code{[]} will parse as the
empty seq, and @code{false} will parse as @code{nil}.  So your code that processes a parsed
structure must handle @code{cl:null}; when generating structure for JSON printing, you must use
@code{cl:null} as a value when you want it to print as JSON @code{null}, and the empty seq when you
want it to print as @code{[]} --- which of course will happen naturally if you use seqs in place of
lists.
@item
With the tuple representation, @code{[]} will still parse as the empty seq, but @code{null} will
parse as @code{nil}.  FSet assumes that you've supplied the correct types for your @href{Macro
define-tuple-key, tuple keys}; when printing, @code{nil} prints as @code{false} if the key is of
boolean type, and as @code{null} otherwise.  So instead of having to generate the structure in an
unnatural way (for CL), you just have to declare your key types.
@end itemize

FSet/Jzon uses the map representation by default because it's easier to get started with, but you
might prefer tuples for serious work.  Tuples are also more space-efficient than maps, but this is
unlikely to matter unless you are processing massive quantities of data.

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node JSON Parsing
@subsection JSON Parsing

Refer to the @uref{https://github.com/Zulu-Inuoe/jzon, Jzon} documentation.  The FSet/Jzon parsing
API exports many of the same names as Jzon, and is mostly used in the same way.  The exception is
when the input contains, potentially, more than one top-level JSON value.  In this case, pass
@code{:allow-multiple-content t} to @code{make-parser} or @code{with-parser}, as you would have with
Jzon, but then call @code{parse-top-level} once for each top-level value you wish to parse.
FSet/Jzon does not export @code{parse-next}.

As mentioned, JSON arrays parse into FSet seqs.  For JSON objects, you have a choice:

@itemize
@item
The default is to parse them into replay maps; these preserve the order of the keys of each object
for printing purposes.
@item
If you want to use the map representation for objects, but you're parsing such a large JSON file
that space is potentially an issue, you can use plain (non-replay) maps, which are somewhat smaller
but don't preserve the key order.  You are unlikely to need this.
@item
Or you can use the tuple representation, as discussed above.
@end itemize

The object representation is controlled by the @var{object-type} keyword argument to
@code{with-parser} or @code{make-parser}.  In the map case, the keys will be strings by default; to
have them interned, pass an appropriate @var{key-package}, or use @var{key-fn} to transform them
into whatever type you like.

Tuples are FSet's most space-efficient and featureful representation of JSON objects, but require a
bit more work to set up.  You will need a tuple key for each key in the JSON you're parsing.  The
name of each tuple key should contain the corresponding JSON key string, normally upcased and with a
prefix and/or suffix added; the use of a prefix and/or suffix is optional, but highly recommended.
For example, if your JSON contains keys "size" and "color", the corresponding tuple key names could
be @code{+JSON-SIZE+} and @code{+JSON-COLOR+} (written here in uppercase because that's how they'll
print, but of course you can normally write them in lowercase in source code).  Thus the prefix is
@code{"+JSON-"} and the suffix is @code{"+"}.  With that in mind, the steps are:

@itemize
@item
For each key that you want to access in your program, write an `fset2:define-tuple-key` form.
@item
To @code{with-parser} or @code{make-parser}, pass @code{:object-type 'tuple}; for
@code{:key-package}, the package containing the tuple key names; and for @code{:key-prefix} and
@code{:key-suffix}, the prefix and suffix to use.  (If you're using a nonstandard reader case mode,
or have mixed-case keys in your JSON input, you can also pass a @code{:key-case-mode} of
@code{:downcase} or @code{:preserve}; @code{:upcase} is the default.)
@end itemize

On printing, the keys will be in the order in which they were declared, or if some keys were found
in the input that had not been declared, the order in which they were first encountered.  (You can
still call @code{fset2:define-tuple-key} on them after parsing, if you hadn't done it beforehand.)

As mentioned above, parsing into tuples (but not maps) converts @code{null} into @code{nil}.  Also,
since printing from tuples prints @code{[]} for @code{nil} when the key is of list type, parsing
converts @code{[]} back to @code{nil} in this case.  So even though I recommend using seqs instead
of lists for sequence-valued data, it's still safe to use lists (but only with tuples, not maps).

@deftp {Data type} json-atom
Re-exported from Jzon.
@end deftp

@deftp {Data type} json-element
@code{(or json-atom seq map tuple)}
@end deftp

@defmac with-parser @r{(@var{var} @var{in} &rest @var{kwd-args}) &body} body
Binds @var{var} around @var{body} to an FSet/Jzon parser that will read from @var{in}, which can
be a vector, a stream, or a pathname.  The keyword arguments are passed unchanged to
@code{make-parser}.  Calls @code{close-parser} on the parser before returning.
@end defmac

@defun make-parser in @r{&key} allow-comments allow-trailing-comma allow-multiple-content @r{(@var{max-string-length} 1048576)}@
    @r{(@var{max-depth} 128)} @r{(@var{key-fn} (make-fset-string-pool))} @r{(@var{object-type} 'replay-map)}@
    key-package @r{(@var{key-case-mode} ':upcase)} @r{(@var{key-prefix} "")} @r{(@var{key-suffix} "")}

If @var{allow-comments} is true, comments as in C (@code{//} for single-line or @code{/* ... */} for block) will
be accepted.  If @var{allow-trailing-comma}, a comma will be permitted after the last element of an
array or object.  @var{max-string-length} limits the length of strings, and
@var{max-depth} the maximum nesting depth; these help protect against DoS attacks.
@var{key-fn} controls whether and how string pooling is done; the default uses an FSet set.

The returned parser should be closed after use; see @code{close-parser}, and macro
@code{with-parser} which closes it automatically.

If @var{allow-multiple-content} is true, the input may contain multiple top-level JSON values, which
you can read by calling @var{parse-top-level} multiple times.

JSON arrays are returned as FSet seqs; JSON objects are returned according to @var{object-type},
which can be @code{replay-map}, @code{map}, or @code{tuple} (symbols in package @code{fset2}).  If
@var{key-package} is supplied, keys will be interned in this package; this option overrides
@var{key-fn}.  If @var{object-type} is @code{tuple}, @var{key-package} is required, and may not be
the CL keyword package.  If @var{key-package} is supplied: (a) @var{key-case-mode} can be any of
@code{:upcase}, @code{:downcase}, or @code{:preserve} (the default is @code{:upcase}); (b) if
supplied, @var{key-prefix} is prepended and @var{key-suffix} is appended to the case-converted key
before interning.
@end defun

@defun close-parser parser
Closes the parser.  If the input was specified as a pathname, closes the input stream.
@end defun

Other parsing-related symbols re-exported from Jzon are: @code{json-atom}, @code{json-error},
@code{json-limit-error}, @code{json-parse-error}, @code{json-parse-limit-error}, and
@code{json-eof-error}.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node JSON Printing
@subsection JSON Printing

For printing, FSet/Jzon mostly just re-exports symbols from Jzon; you invoke the printer in the same
way, but methods have been added to print the FSet collections that the parser can produce.  So the
tree you supply can contain anything that Jzon knows how to print, possibly with FSet collections
mixed in.  The printing-related Jzon symbols re-exported are: @code{stringify},
@code{json-write-error}, @code{json-write-limit-error}, @code{json-recursive-write-error},
@code{coerced-fields}, @code{coerce-key}, @code{writer}, @code{make-writer}, @code{close-writer},
and @code{with-writer}.

The one new printing-related function concerns tuple keys.  As noted above, you may wish, when
parsing JSON objects into tuples, to wrap the key strings with a prefix and/or suffix before
interning them.  When printing, you will probably want to strip these off.  FSet/Jzon exports the
generic function @code{coerce-tuple-key} (see below), which gives you a package-specific way to do
that.

Jzon has three different ways it can print @code{nil}, depending on the type of the class slot
holding the value: @code{[]} for a list; @code{false} for a boolean; or @code{null} for all other
types.  If you're using tuples to represent JSON objects, you can get the same effect by using the
@code{:type} keyword argument to @href{Macro define-tuple-key, @code{define-tuple-key}}.  (Of
course, an empty seq will always print as @code{[]}.)  Examples:

@example
(define-tuple-key +json-color+ :type (or null string))
(define-tuple-key +json-visible?+ :type boolean)
@end example

@defun coerce-tuple-key key key-name-package-as-keyword
Generic function that FSet/Jzon calls to turn a @code{tuple-key} into a string.
@code{coerce-tuple-key} is called with the key as the first argument, and the key's name's package
name, as a keyword symbol, as the second.  This arrangement allows you to write methods like

@example
(defmethod coerce-tuple-key (key (pkg (eql :my-package)))
  (let ((name (string (tuple-key-name key))))
    (assert (string= name "+JSON-" :end1 6))
    (string-downcase (subseq name 6 (1- (length name))))))
@end example

which will reverse the effect of passing @code{"+JSON-"} as @var{key-prefix} and @code{"+"} as
@var{key-suffix} to @code{make-parser} or @code{with-parser}.
@end defun


@c ================================================================================
@node Compiler Externalization
@section Compiler Externalization

A Common Lisp compiler is required to be able to write compiled files containing representations of
Lisp objects, a process called externalization or serialization.  It is standard for these
representations to be in binary form, so that loading them is efficient; hence the common term
``FASL files'', for ``FASt Load''.  While a full discussion of how to use this facility for
externalizing arbitrary data is beyond the scope of this book, I can give some hints.

A trick I have seen used is this: perform some long computation resulting in some data structures;
write a temporary source file containing forms that reference those data structures; in the same
Lisp session, invoke @code{compile-file} on that file, to produce a FASL file containing the desired
data.

The generated source file might contain forms that look like this:

@example
(defparameter *some-variable* #.(some-function))
@end example

Here the @code{#.} standard reader macro causes the following form to be evaluated at read time.
@code{some-function} should return the object to be dumped; every object reachable from it will also
be dumped automatically.  Bind @code{*read-eval*} to @code{t} around the call to
@code{compile-file}; if it has been set to @code{nil}, the @code{#.} will cause an error.

The following FSet classes have @code{make-load-form} methods, allowing them to be dumped in this
way: @code{wb-set}, @code{ch-set}, @code{wb-bag}, @code{ch-bag}, @code{wb-map}, @code{ch-map},
@code{wb-seq}, @code{complement-set}, @code{wb-replay-set}, @code{ch-replay-set},
@code{wb-replay-map}, @code{ch-replay-map}, @code{wb-2-relation}, @code{ch-2-relation},
@code{dyn-tuple}, @code{tuple-key}.

