@ignore

© 2026 Scott L. Burson

This document is published under the Creative Commons
@uref{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/, CC BY-NC-SA 4.0} license.  This license
enables reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format for
noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator.  If you remix,
adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms.
@end ignore

@node Recommendations for Language Designers
@chapter Recommendations for Language Designers

In this chapter I widen the scope, and discuss properties of FSet that I think would have value in
other languages as well.  I then move on to critiques of libraries for other languages, from an FSet
perspective.

@hrule{}


@c ================================================================================
@node Features of FSet
@section Features of FSet

One thing I've tried to do in FSet is to choose names for functional update operations carefully.  I
recall reading once about newcomers to Java trying to use its @code{BigInteger} class, which is
functional.  They tended to expect an expression @code{x.add(y)} to mutate @code{x} to contain the
sum, when it returns the sum instead.  I contend that naming the operation @code{plus} instead of
@code{add} would have largely prevented this confusion; people have written @code{x + y} since they
were children in school, and no one thinks of that as somehow changing the value of @code{x},
whatever that would even mean in a mathematical context.  (Java doesn't support operator
overloading, so literally making @code{x + y} work on @code{BigInteger} was not an available option;
@code{x.plus(y)} is the closest one could get.)

Two important operations in FSet are named @code{with} and @code{less}; @code{with} adds an element
or pair to a collection, while @code{less} removes one.  These names come from SETL.  Like
@code{plus}, they are prepositions.

Naming things is always a matter of tradeoffs.  Good names make code understandable by carrying the
right connotations, but names also need to be reasonably familiar words, and for common operations,
not too long.  I wouldn't go so far as to say that all functional update operations should be named
by prepositions, but I do think that, other things being equal, prepositions and nouns tend to be
better choices than verbs, and verbs that don't connote mutation are better than those that do.  In
a couple of cases, where the obvious names @code{insert} and @code{splice} strongly connote
mutation, I have used their past participles (@code{inserted} and @code{spliced}) instead of their
base forms.  (Honesty compels me to admit that this is a recent change; I have not, historically,
adhered to my own desideratum as well as I would have liked.  But I still recommend it.)

Here are some other functional collections libraries and the names they use for operations like
@code{with} and @code{less}:

@multitable @columnfractions .12 .25 .25 .2
@item @b{Library} @tab @b{@code{with}} (on sets/on maps) @tab @b{@code{less}} (on sets/on maps) @tab @b{notes}
@item Clojure core @tab @code{conj} / @code{assoc} @tab @code{disj} / @code{dissoc}
@item Racket @tab @code{hash-set} @tab @code{hash-remove} @tab 1
@item Scala @tab @code{incl} / @code{updated} @tab @code{excl} / @code{removed} @tab 2
@item Haskell @tab @code{insert} @tab @code{delete} @tab 3
@item SML/NJ @tab @code{add} / @code{insert} @tab @code{subtract} / @code{remove}
@item Pyrsistent (Python) @tab @code{add} / @code{set} @tab @code{remove}
@item RPDS (Rust) @tab @code{insert} @tab @code{remove}
@end multitable

Notes:

@enumerate
@item @ilc{1}
Only maps (hash tables) are provided.  Racket uses the popular Scheme convention that names of
mutating operations end in @code{!}; someone familiar with that convention should be able to guess
that these are functional updates.
@item @ilc{2}
Here we see a use of past participles.
@item @ilc{3}
Of course, there's no ambiguity here since anyone writing Haskell knows it's a pure functional language.
@end enumerate

A lot of these sound to me like verbs of mutation, with Clojure and Scala being the two languages
that seem to have gone to some effort to avoid those.

Another area where I would hold FSet up as an example is space efficiency.  I wanted to support
client programs that use many small collection instances, as well as those that use large
collections.  Two things I have done to reduce space overhead are:

@itemize
@item
It's not uncommon for people to implement maps first, then reuse the implementation for sets, by
wrapping it with a set API that uses only the map key slots; the value slots are still allocated,
but don't contain anything important.  FSet sets are implemented separately from maps, so they don't
waste this space.
@item
The WB-tree implementations, including that of seqs, use heterogeneous trees: instead of having tree
nodes all the way down to the leaves, they keep the lowest two to four levels of the tree in
bounded-length vectors.  This saves a lot of space on small collections; for example, an 8-element
set made entirely of tree nodes would take an estimated 37 words, but in FSet, it's just 11 words,
assuming no alignment padding.
@end itemize

Turning to semantic features, FSet has several that I would recommend to language and library
designers:

@itemize
@item
@href{Map and Seq Defaults, Defaults} associated with maps and seqs.  This not a difficult feature
to add; the only complications show up in operations like @href{Method map-union (map map),
@code{map-union}} that arguably need to do something sensible with the defaults of their operands
(though, simply ignoring them might be a viable option).
@item
@href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, Quasi-mutating operators}, on the other hand, are likely to require
language support; few languages are designed in such a way that they could be added as a library.
@item
@href{Bags, Bags}, though not as commonly used as maps or sets, are still handy often enough to
deserve inclusion in a comprehensive collections library.  Although these can be implemented as just
a wrapper around maps, FSet has separate implementations for them, so as to be able to track both
the bag size (the total of the multiplicities) and the set size (the number of unique elements) for
every subtree.
@item
@href{Binary Relations, Binary relations} are another type that are useful enough to be worth
implementing.
@item
@href{Left Preference, Left preference} is a property of operations such as @href{Method union (set
set), @code{union}} that combine two collections into a third in some way.  It says that when the
two operands contain distinct objects that are nonetheless equal according to the applicable
comparison function, and one of those objects is used in the result, the one in the result will
always be the one that came from the left operand.  The Haskell library also makes this guarantee.
@item
Allowing comparison functions to implement a @href{Strict Weak Orderings, strict weak ordering},
instead of requiring (or at least assuming) a total ordering, is perhaps a more controversial design
choice.  There is a small amount of overhead associated with allowing for the possibility of
equivalent-but-unequal elements; the feature is not completely free.  For Common Lisp, it is
arguably a necessity, if only because of the admittedly rare case of uninterned symbols with the
same name (but I have seen macros generate such symbols in the wild; the concern is not academic).
In other languages, you (or rather, your users) can probably live without it the vast majority of
the time, but I wonder whether there might not be rare exceptions.  None of the other ordered-tree
collections implementations I have looked at allow strict weak orderings, though.
@end itemize

@c ================================================================================
@node Critiques of FSet
@section Critiques of FSet

Before I critique other languages and  libraries, I think it's only fair to say a little about what
aspects of FSet I would @emph{not} encourage others to duplicate.

@subheading WB-trees are obsolete

Perhaps the most prominent is that weight-balanced trees (WB-trees) are considered obsolete; the
consensus seems to be that, even among ordered tree data structures, there are alternatives that
produce better-balanced trees.
@uref{https://www.cs.tufts.edu/comp/150FP/archive/chris-okasaki/redblack99.pdf, Chris Okasaki's
functional red-black trees} are a commonly cited example, but there may be others worth considering.

Poorly-balanced trees make access slower, by increasing the average depth of the tree, requiring
lookups to walk down more levels and perform more comparisons, on average.  That said, the amount of
potential improvement that WB-trees leave on the table is not large --- around 10% in the worst case.

The CHAMP trees, which are now FSet's default for sets, maps, and bags, are faster than any
ordered-tree data structure anyway.  WB-trees are needed only for the cases in which you want the
collection maintained in some specific order.  So switching to another kind of ordered tree has not
seemed urgent to me.  Still, if you're starting a functional-collections project from scratch, it's
worth looking at the alternatives.

For seqs, it appears that a better choice would be Phil Bagwell and Tiark Rompf's
@uref{https://infoscience.epfl.ch/server/api/core/bitstreams/e5d662ea-1e8d-4dda-b917-8cbb8bb40bf9/content,
relaxed-radix B-trees} (RRB-trees).  These were invented for Clojure, because its oriiginal
functional vector type had poor time complexity for insertion and concatenation.  They should have
noticeably better indexing performance than FSet's @code{wb-seq}, at the cost of making insertion,
subsequencing, and concatenation more expensive (these are all constant-factor differences; the time
complexities are all logarithmic).  This sounds like a trade worth making for most applications, but
I'm not sure it's a slam dunk.  As I've argued earlier, I think random access into a sequence is
relatively rare; clients more commonly iterate over the sequence or a subrange of it, and even with
FSet's WB-trees, that operation is as fast per element as it would be with RRB-trees.  So again,
changing data structures for FSet has not seemed urgent.  Still, for a new library, RRB-trees would
probably be the recommended option.

@subheading Overgrown or overengineered in places

It's not too unusual an experience for me to look at some part of FSet that I have written and
wonder whether anyone has ever used it.  The poster child for this phenomenon is probably the
@href{Reader Macros, reader macros}; I haven't used them myself, and don't know whether anyone else
has.  What I didn't know when I wrote them was that the constructor macros would be entirely
sufficient in practice.

When I was first adding custom orderings to FSet, I started with WB-sets.  I didn't want WB-sets
that didn't use the feature to pay the space cost --- just one word in the wrapper object --- of
allowing custom orderings, so I bifurcated the class into @code{wb-default-set} and
@code{wb-custom-set}, where only the latter has the field holding the ordering.  I now think this
was excessively fussy, though on the other hand, I don't see the point of removing it.  (I didn't do
this with any of the other types; they already have more space overhead, anyway, so the relative
benefit would have been even smaller.)

@subheading Some features are historical

The WB-tree implementations of replay sets and maps are clearly obsolete and I should probably
remove them, in favor of the CHAMP versions.  Iteration order is not an issue with the replay types,
because it's controlled by the client anyway.

@subheading No laziness

FSet has no lazy collections, though it does define an iterator protocol --- two of them, actually,
one @href{Stateful Iterators, stateful} and one @href{Functional Iterators, functional} --- that can
be used for similar purposes, if not as elegantly.  (@href{GMap, GMap} argument generators are even
more like lazy sequences.)


@c ================================================================================
@node History of Functional Collections
@section History of Functional Collections

While I haven't done a thorough historical survey, I have looked a little bit into the question of
what languages first had functional collections, and how they worked.

Lists in Lisp programs can be, and often are, used functionally, though even early Lisps had
mutating operators (then called @code{rplaca} (``replace @code{car}'') and @code{rplacd} (``replace
@code{cdr}''); in CL they are called @code{(setf car)} and @code{(setf cdr)}).  So with that caveat,
I think Lisp has to be considered as among the first.

But the earliest language I am aware of that had resizable collections with language-enforced
functional semantics was APL (1962).  Its collections were restricted to be arrays of numbers;
assignment of an array in one variable to another variable copied the contents, preventing aliasing.

Another early language with functional collections was SETL (1969).  This was, to my knowledge, the
first language with collection semantics influenced by set theory.  SETL strongly influenced a
little-known proprietary language called Refine that I worked in a lot between 1987 and 2003;
Refine, in turn, strongly influenced the design of FSet.  In particular, the operator names
@code{with} and @code{less} come to FSet from SETL via Refine.

(@uref{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SETL, Wikipedia's SETL page} tells me that SETL influenced
another language called ABC, which Guido van Rossum has referred to as ``Python's predecessor''.
Alas, while ABC's collections had value semantics, Python's built-in collections have reference
semantics.  An opportunity lost, I'd call that.)

@c ================================================================================
@node Critiques of Other Libraries
@section Critiques of Other Libraries

Here I take a look at some functional collections libraries for other popular languages, from an FSet
perspective.

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Clojure
@subsection Clojure

Rich Hickey's creation of @uref{https://clojure.org/, Clojure} has been massively impactful in
popularizing functional collections.  Looking over its API from an FSet point of view, it is hard to
find much to criticize.  Our choices of operation names are somewhat different --- for @code{with}
and @code{less}, Clojure uses @code{conj} and @code{disj} on sets and @code{assoc} and @code{dissoc}
on maps.  But in terms of functionality, there's a lot of overlap.

Clojure tries harder than Common Lisp does to enforce a mostly-functional style; it doesn't permit
assigning new values to existing local variables.  But it's not completely pure: there are
references that can be updated within transactions.  For that purpose there is @code{alter}, which
is a general @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators, quasi-mutating operator}.

One significant difference is that Clojure uses @href{Abstract and Concrete Equality, abstract
equality} while FSet, following Common Lisp, uses concrete equality.

Clojure does not have as rich a collection of map-combining operators as FSet.  Clojure's
@code{merge} is like @href{Method map-union (map map), @code{map-union}}, except that there is no
@var{val-fn} parameter to alter the behavior that pairs from the right operand shadow those from the
left.  So it's less general than @code{map-union}; and there's nothing equivalent to
@code{map-intersection} or @code{map-difference}.

On the other hand, Clojure has general relations, which are on my wishlist for FSet, but not yet
written.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Scheme (R6RS)
@subsection Scheme (R6RS)

@uref{https://www.r6rs.org/, R6RS Scheme} has mutable hash tables and ... that seems to be it.

Well, wait: there's a little more to be said.  Strings are immutable.  Functional point update
operations are not provided, presumably out of time complexity concerns, but @code{string-append}
and @code{substring} are provided, and there are functions to convert to and from lists of
characters; I guess the idea is that fine-grained string construction will be done using lists and
then converted.  Amusingly, there's @code{string-copy}, though it's hard to see why one would ever
use it.

On first reading, it appears that pairs, and therefore lists, are immutable, so that lists are
indeed a functional type.  That would be great --- but then one reads farther and finds the
@code{mutable-pairs} library, which brings in @code{set-car!} and @code{set-cdr!}, which operate on
the same pair type.  So you can't absolutely count on your lists not getting mutated.

Like CL, Scheme has a ``deep equality'' predicate @code{equal?}.  This is very similar to CL's
@code{equal}, except that it compares vectors by content, even though they're mutable.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Racket
@subsection Racket

@uref{https://racket-lang.org/, Racket} improves on Scheme by making immutable and mutable pairs
distinct types, the latter being constructed with @code{mcons}, accessed with @code{mcar}, @i{etc.}
Racket also has both immutable and mutable strings, vectors, and hash tables.  Bravo!  But of its
immutable types, only hash tables have any functional update operators; the others are merely
protected from mutation.

Racket also has an equality predicate, @code{equal-always?}, that compares immutable objects of the
same type by content, and mutable ones by identity, as I have argued one should.  However, its use
is not encouraged; the name is too long for frequent use, and the manual
@uref{https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/Equality.html, says} ``@code{equal?} is preferred for
most uses''.  But @code{equal?} compares mutable objects by content, as in Scheme.

What I wish here is that Racket would rename @code{equal?} to @code{currently-equal?}, then rename
@code{equal-always?} to @code{equal?}.  But I suppose such an incompatible change was off the table
even in the early days of Racket, since it was intended to be upward-compatible with Scheme.  Short
of that, I think they should at least find a shorter name for @code{equal-always?}, and encourage
people to use it.  Coming up with a good name is not trivial, though.  Maybe give a nod to Henry
Baker and go with @code{egal?}.

More broadly, I think what Racket shows is that there's more to well-designed functional collections
than mere immutability.  Racket takes some helpful steps in the functional-programming direction,
but doesn't fully embrace the paradigm.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Haskell
@subsection Haskell

@uref{https://www.haskell.org/, Haskell} is, to my knowledge, the most widely used pure functional
language.

As one might expect, Haskell is well supplied with functional collections.  I found sets, maps, and
sequences in a Containers package, bags in a Multiset package, and binary relations in a Relation
package.  All these are implemented as weight-balanced trees except for the sequences, which are 2-3
finger trees.  Other implementations are probably available, though; there are over 17,000 packages
on @code{hackage.haskell.org}.  I didn't find anything like FSet's replay sets and maps, but maybe I
just don't know what the package is called.

All of the types I found seem to be generously supplied with operations.  Very impressive!

I did notice a few minor differences between FSet's approach and Haskell's.  These are not all
criticisms of Haskell, and even if they were, they would be quite minor; FSet and Haskell clearly
have considerable overlap in our philosophies.

The idea of a default associated with a map doesn't seem to have occurred to them.  @code{Data.Map}
has several lookup operations: @code{lookup} which returns a @code{Maybe} to handle the missing-key
case; @code{!}, which errors on a missing key; and @code{findWithDefault}, that lets you supply a
default at lookup time.

They have several flavors of map union.  @code{unionWith} is closest to FSet's @code{map-union},
though it doesn't require or assume an idempotent value-combining function; the potential
optimization by doing so doesn't seem to have occurred to them.  They have map intersection and
difference as well, and even the map difference has a flavor that accepts a combining function.

Their map type has a @code{map} operation, which FSet calls @code{compose}; amusing that they use
the word ``map'' in both senses.  @code{mapWithKey} corresponds to FSet's @code{map-image}.

Their union and intersection operations, on both sets and maps, implement @href{Left Preference,
left preference}.  As I said --- there's lots of commonality here.

On the whole, I'd say FSet still has a little bit to teach Haskell, but also quite a lot to learn
from it.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Scala
@subsection Scala

@uref{https://www.scala-lang.org/, Scala} is a multiparadigm language like Common Lisp; though it's
statically typed, it seems to have been influenced by Lisp in some ways --- it's
expression-oriented, for instance, and comes with a REPL.  It might be my language of choice if I
weren't so fond of Common Lisp.  Though it's not pure like Haskell, it does have good support for
the functional style.

Being a language, not just a library, Scala could have added @href{Quasi-Mutating Operators,
quasi-mutating operators}, but doesn't have them.

Immutable maps have a @code{withDefault} method, although it takes a function to compute the default
rather than just the default value.  This is more powerful in some ways, yet it limits what the
implementation can do with the default; for example, FSet's @code{map-difference} will tell you if
the first argument map has a default different from the second's.  Scala wouldn't be able to do this.

But Scala's map combining operations are impoverished compared to both Haskell's and FSet's; it has
neither intersection nor difference operations, and its map union operation can only do shadowing of
values in the left operand by those in the right one; there's no provision for a value-combining function.

These are fairly minor points, though.  Overall, it looks like Scala's functional collections seem
nearly as well built out as Haskell's.

Like Clojure and Java, Scala uses @href{Abstract and Concrete Equality, abstract equality}.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Google Guava
@subsection Google Guava

Google's Guava library for Java includes some immutable collection classes.  I mention them as a
good example of why I avoid the term ``immutable'', because these collections are @emph{only}
immutable: there are constructors so you can create them, but there are no sublinear-time functional
update operations to make new ones out of existing ones.  So they're not intended for use in
functional algorithms.  They do have some software-engineering advantages over Java's standard
stateful collections, such as being good things to pass across interfaces, but though I agree that
that's valuable, to me it's only one of several desirable qualities of functional collections.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Python
@subsection Python

Python's built-in types include @code{frozenset} , which is immutable in the same sense as the Guava
collections.  It has union and intersection indicated by @code{|} and @code{&}, which seems a bit
terse to me (there are also methods called @code{union} and @code{intersection}).  Curiously, it
defines the comparison operators (@code{<} @i{etc.}) as subset/superset tests, which of course
imposes a partial order rather than a total order, so sorting a list of sets by this ordering
doesn't work.  Frozensets are intended for use as set elements or map keys, so some nesting is
supported.

Python's strings and tuples are also immutable.  Clearly attention was paid to preventing the
possibility of mutating a set element or map key --- good to see.

I see no sign of an immutable map class in the base library (there's no @code{frozendict}).

However, there is a library called Pyrsistent that seems popular and provides functional sets, maps,
bags, and sequences.  It has something called ``evolvers'' which appear to be what Clojure and
FSet call ``transients''.  They support the standard mutation protocols, so you can pass one to
legacy code that expects a mutable collection and mutates it, and then obtain a persistent copy on
return --- a cute feature.  Their functional-record class @code{PRecord} has some interesting
features, including typed fields and general invariants.

The @code{transform} method seems to be a quasi-mutating operator, though I don't yet understand how
it works.

@code{PVector}, their sequence class, has linear-time insertion, deletion, and concatenation; this
could be improved on.  The @code{PMap} implementation is just a hash table implemented on top of
that; I expect it wouldn't perform as well as CHAMP (but hey, this is Python anyway).  And
@code{PSet} is built on top of @code{PMap}, rather than being implemented separately.

