@settitle Modern Common Lisp with FSet (DRAFT)

@node Top
@top Modern Common Lisp with FSet (DRAFT)

@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

Version 0.4

© 2026 Scott L. Burson

This document is published under the Creative Commons
@uref{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/, CC BY-NC-SA 4.0} license.  This license
enables reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format for
noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator.  If you remix,
adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms.

This document contains no LLM-generated text --- zip, zero, nada.  (Yes, I do use em-dashes and
semicolons; yes, I have written them all myself.)

@c ================================================================================

@c `'href': HTML-style references that produce parentheticals in other formats.
@ifhtml
@macro href{reference, text}
@link{\reference\, \text\}
@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro href{text, reference}
\text\ (@pxref{\reference\})
@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@c ``cref'': A reference to a code object name.
@macro cref{name}
@href{\name\, @code{\name\}}
@end macro

@c ``InLine Comment'' (comment text is brace-delimited rather than newline-delimited)
@macro ilc{stuff}
@end macro

@c ``hrule'': A horizontal rule in HTML.
@macro hrule{}
@html
<hr>
@end html
@end macro

@c ================================================================================

@contents

@include Introduction.texi
@include Getting-Started.texi
@include Examples.texi
@include Conceptual-Background.texi
@include Design.texi
@include Data-Structures.texi
@include API-Reference.texi
@include Iterating.texi
@include Conversions.texi
@include Printing-Reading.texi
@include Recommendations.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@ignore
Introduction
  Whom This Book is For
  Why I Wrote FSet
  Benefits of Functional Collections
Getting Started
  Tutorial
  Using FSet
  Misc-Extensions
Examples
Conceptual Background
  What is a Functional Datatype?
  Is Lisp a Functional Language?
  A Brief Introduction to Big-O
Design of FSet
  Design Goals
  Divergences from CL
  Comparison and Equality
    Mixed-Type Collections
  Seqs and Strings
  The @code{@@} Macro
  Map and Seq Defaults
  Quasi-Mutating Operators
FSet Data Structures
  Weight-Balanced trees
  CHAMP trees
  Comparison Functions
  Generic Function @code{compare}
  Generic Function @code{hash-value}
  User-Defined Classes
    @code{define-equality-slots}
    Left Preference
  Custom Compare and Hash Functions
    Which Elements are Compared or Hashed
    Strict Weak Orderings
  Choosing a Data Structure
  Transients
  Dynamic Tuples
FSet Collection Types
  Sets
    Union, Intersection, and Difference
  Maps
    Map Union, Intersection, and Difference
  Bags
    Two-Bag Operations
      (these accept sets)
  Seqs
    Character Seqs
  Binary Relations
  Replay Sets
  Replay Maps
  Tuples
  Complement Sets
  The Bleeding Edge
    List Relations and Query Registries
     Interval Sets
    Bounded Sets
Iterating over FSet Collections
  The @code{do-} Macros
  Higher-Order Functions
    @code{image}
    @code{filter}
    @code{reduce}
  Iterators
    Stateful
    Functional
  GMap
  Iterate
  Others
Generic Function @code{convert}
Printing and Reading
  JSON
Larger Examples
Recommendations for Language Designers
  Features of FSet
  Critiques of FSet
  Critiques of Other Libraries
    Clojure
    Haskell
    Scala
    C++
    Google Guava
    Pyrsistent
    https://github.com/orium/rpds, https://github.com/victorcolombo/prust, https://docs.rs/im/latest/im/
    Immer

Notes:
() Should there be a separate Performance section? [no]

Remaining to be done:
  (x) @code{convert}
  (x) GMap
  (x) Finish Iteration
  (x) Reader macros
  (x) JSON
  ( ) Statement on use of AI
  ( ) Fill out Recommendations chapter
  ( ) Scatter small examples?
  ( ) Emacs patches/recommendations
  ( ) Lem case study
  ( ) Bounded sets (redo first?)

For 2.4.0 release notes:
  Parsing JSON into tuples will no longer use @code{null} as a value.

Operations named by verbs:
- lookup (but not a verb of modification) (1)
- split-{from,above,through,below} (can also be read as an adjective) (3)
- partition  (4)
- filter  (4)
- reduce (CL)  (1)
- restrict{,-not}  (4)
- compose (1)
- insert  --> inserted  (9)
- splice  --> spliced  (9)
- concat (but 'cl:concatenate' is a function)  (7)
- convert (not a verb of modification) (2)
- reverse (CL)  (2)
- sort (CL)  (4)
- sort-and-group  (4)
- find etc.; count etc. (CL; not verbs of modification)  (1)
- remove (CL; cf. 'delete')  (3)
- substitute (CL; cf. 'nsubstitute')  (3)
- update  --> updated (7)

@end ignore

