@node FSet Tutorial
@section FSet Tutorial

If you are new to FSet, this tutorial will get you up and running quickly.  We have just a few
preliminaries before we get started.  First, this tutorial is addressed to those who have acquired
at least some familiarity with Common Lisp; it's not the place to start for newcomers to the
language.  Second, you will want to have a copy of FSet running so you can follow along.  Assuming
you are already using Quicklisp, just do

@example
> @b{(ql:quickload "fset")}
@end example

This tutorial presents FSet 2; you should be using v2.4.0 or later.  If, at the time you read this,
Quicklisp is still on v2.2.0, I strongly recommend getting the latest release from either
@uref{https://gitlab.common-lisp.net/fset/fset, Common-Lisp.net} or
@uref{https://github.com/slburson/fset, GitHub}.  If you clone the repo into
@code{~/quicklisp/local-projects/}, Quicklisp will use it automatically.  To find out what version
Quicklisp is providing, you can do

@example
% grep ^fset ~/quicklisp/dists/quicklisp/releases.txt
@end example

FSet 2 added two new packages, @code{fset2} and @code{fset2-user}; it also changed the default
implementations of sets and maps from the older WB-tree collections to the newer CHAMP collections.
The aspect of that change that is relevant to this tutorial is that the CHAMP types print with a
double sharpsign, @code{##}; you will see this in the examples below.

@hrule{}

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node The Major FSet Types
@subsection The Major FSet Types
FSet provides four major types: sets, maps, seqs, and bags.  Sets are the most basic: a set is an
unordered collection of unique elements.  (FSet imposes an ordering, but this is a standard ordering
FSet uses for its own purposes, and can't be changed for a particular set instance.)  Maps are
perhaps the most useful: a map, like a hash table, associates each of a set of keys with a unique
value.  Seqs are FSet's sequences; I use a shortened form of the word "sequence" because
@code{sequence} is, of course, already a CL type name.  And finally, bags (another term is
"multisets") are somewhat like sets except that a bag remembers the number of times each element has
been added to it.

The examples assume one is typing to a REPL.  User input is shown in bold.  To follow along, which I
highly recommend, assuming you have installed and loaded FSet, first do this:

@example
> @b{(in-package fset2-user)}
@end example

@hrule{}

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Sets Tutorial
@subsubsection Sets Tutorial
The simplest way to create a set is with the function @code{empty-set}:

@example
> @b{(defparameter es (empty-set))}
ES
> es
##@{ @}
@end example

Now we can add an element to the set with @code{with}:

@example
> @b{(defparameter s (with es 3))}
S
> s
##@{ 3 @}
@end example

You can see that the @code{with} function has returned a new set without modifying the original:

@example
> @b{es}
##@{ @}
@end example

The function @code{empty?} tells you whether a set is empty.  (FSet uses the trailing question mark
rather than the older @code{-p} convention for the names of boolean-valued functions.)

@example
> @b{(empty? s)}
NIL
> @b{(empty? es)}
T
@end example

If the set is not empty, @code{arb} will give you an arbitrary one of its elements:

@example
> @b{(arb s)}
3
T
@end example

Note that @code{arb} is not guaranteed to give you any particular element, nor is its job to give you
a "randomly selected" element.  Its only postcondition is to give you @emph{some} element of the set.
This contract may seem a bit odd, but it gives the implementation flexibility to return a
"convenient" element.  And it's still usable in algorithms.  For one thing, if the set is a singleton
(has size 1), then @code{arb} is guaranteed to return the only element.  For another, some "workset"
algorithms don't need a particular element; they just need to pull some element out of the set on each
loop iteration until it's empty.  (Example below.)

(The second value of @code{T} indicates that the set was, in fact, nonempty; FSet's philosophy is to
use multiple values to indicate special cases, when that makes sense, instead of signalling errors.)

Having obtained an element of the set, we can remove it with @code{less}:

@example
> @b{(less s 3)}
##@{ @}
@end example

This may not seem too exciting yet, but it is already enough to write certain algorithms which have
this general form:

@example
(let ((workset (some-set)))
  (loop while (not (empty? workset))
    (let ((x (arb workset)))
      (setq workset (less workset x))
      (some-operation-on x)
      (dolist (y (successors-of-some-kind x))
        (if (some-predicate y)
          (setq workset (with workset y)))))))
@end example

Another important function on sets is @code{size}, which returns the number of elements:

@example
> @b{(size s)}
1
@end example

To test membership of a particular value, there's @code{contains?}:

@example
> @b{(contains? s 2)}
NIL
> @b{(contains? s 3)}
T
@end example

Constructing literal sets by repeated applications of @code{with} gets tedious, so FSet provides a
constructor macro which is simply called @code{set}.  (We have shadowed @code{cl:set}, which is
archaic anyway, in the @code{fset-user} package.) For example:

@example
> @b{(set)}
##@{ @}
> @b{(defparameter s1 (set 1 2 3))}
S1
> s1
##@{ 1 2 3 @}
> @b{(defparameter s2 (set 'c 1 "foo" 'a 'c))}
S2
> s2
##@{ 1 C A "foo" @}
@end example

(The order in which set and map elements are printed can depend on which Common Lisp implementation
you are running on.)

You can see that FSet handles many builtin Lisp types (we'll get to the whole list later); that
mixing types in a collection is no problem, of course, this being Lisp; that sets ignore duplication
of elements; and that FSet imposes its own ordering on sets.

The @code{set} constructor macro has a syntax for including all the elements of another set (this is
why it's a macro):

@example
> @b{(set ($ s1) 'x)}
##@{ 1 2 3 X @}
@end example

Given a couple of sets, we can start to do some more interesting things with them:

@example
> @b{(equal? s1 (set 3 2 1))}
T
> @b{(union s1 s2)}
##@{ 1 2 3 C A "foo" @}
> @b{(intersection s1 s2)}
##@{ 1 @}
> @b{(set-difference s1 s2)}
##@{ 2 3 @}
> @b{(set-difference-2 s1 s2)}
##@{ 2 3 @}
##@{ C A "foo" @}
@end example

(That last one is returning both differences as two values.)

FSet provides alternate versions of many CL functions, which are intended to be shadowing-imported
into your code package (and are, obviously, in @code{fset-user}).  Most of these are CLOS generic
functions, with compatibility methods so they will do the same thing as the CL builtins if invoked
on non-FSet types.  However, you see we have a separate predicate @code{equal?} rather than
shadowing @code{cl:equal}.

There are also a couple of useful predicates on pairs of sets:

@example
> @b{(subset? (set 1 2) s1)}
T
> @b{(subset? s1 (set 1 2))}
NIL
> @b{(disjoint? s1 (set 1 2))}
NIL
> @b{(disjoint? s1 (set 4 5))}
T
@end example

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Maps Tutorial
@subsubsection Maps Tutorial

You can create an empty map with @code{empty-map}; @code{with} on a map takes two arguments:

@example
> @b{(empty-map)}
##@{| |@}
> @b{(defparameter m1 (with (empty-map) 'x 1))}
M1
> m1
##@{| (X 1) |@}
@end example

Retrieving the value associated with a map key is done with @code{lookup} or its synonym @code{@@}
(which to use is a stylistic choice I'll discuss further below; herein I'll mostly use @code{@@}):

@example
> @b{(lookup m1 'x)}
1
T     ; second value indicates whether the key was found
X     ; third value is the key object in the map (ignore this for now)
> @b{(@ m1 'x)}
1
T
X
> @b{(@ m1 'y)}
NIL
NIL
NIL
@end example

As you see, these functions return a second value indicating whether the key was in the map.  This
is in case you're using @code{nil} as a range element; since such usage is rare, most of the time
you can ignore the second value.  Also as you see, the "default default" for the primary value, when
the key is not in the map, is @code{nil}.  The default can be changed, though, either by supplying
an argument to @code{empty-map} when first creating the map, or later by using @code{with-default}:

@example
> @b{(defparameter m2 (with (empty-map :default 0) 'x 1))}
M2
> m2
##@{| (X 1) |@}/0
> @b{(@ m2 'x)}
1
T
X
> @b{(@ m2 'y)}
0
NIL
NIL
> @b{(setq m2 (with-default m2 3))}
##@{| (X 1) |@}/3
> @b{(@ m2 'y)}
3
NIL
NIL
@end example

(When the default is not @code{nil}, it is printed after the map, separated by a slash.)

There is also a constructor macro for maps called @code{map} --- the obvious choice of name except
that it requires shadowing @code{cl:map}, which is a little unfortunate (but see the discussion of
GMap below).  The @code{map} macro has a more complex syntax than @code{set} since it accepts pairs:

@example
> @b{(defparameter m3 (map ('a 1) ('b 2)))}
M3
> m3
##@{| (B 2) (A 1) |@}
@end example

Note that the sublists immediately within the @code{map} form are not forms, but pairs of forms
(e.g. @code{('a} @code{1)} is not evaluated, but @code{'a} and @code{1} are evaluated separately).
The macro also supports the @code{$} syntax for including the pairs of another map:

@example
> @b{(defparameter m4 (map ('b 3) ('c 4)))}
M4
> m4
##@{| (B 3) (C 4) |@}
> @b{(defparameter m5 (map ($ m3) ('D 42) ($ m4)))}
M5
> m5
##@{| (B 3) (C 4) (A 1) (D 42) |@}
@end example

As you see, when two of the maps included with @code{$} have pairs with the same key, the one on the
right wins.

The `map` macro also gives you a convenient way to specify the default for a map:

@example
> @b{(defparameter m6 (map ('e 5) :default 0))}
M6
> @b{m6}
##@{| (E 5) |@}/0
@end example

It is possible for a map to have @emph{no} default.  This case is distinct from a default of
@code{nil} in two ways: the map prints with @code{/[no default]} on the end, and an error is
signalled by @code{lookup} or @code{@@} when the key is not in the map:

@example
> @b{(defparameter m7 (empty-map :no-default? t))}
M7
> @b{m7}
##@{| |@}/[no default]
> @b{(@ m7 'a)}
@i{error signalled} (use the debugger's "abort" command to return to the REPL)
@end example

There are some interesting and powerful operations to combine maps.  @code{map-difference-2}
returns, as two values, the mappings in its first argument that are not in its second, and
conversely:

@example
> @b{(map-difference-2 m3 m5)}
##@{| (B 2) |@}/[no default]
##@{| (B 3) (C 4) (D 42) |@}/[no default]
@end example

Here, the fact that the returned maps have no default tells you that the defaults of the arguments
were equal.

The functions @code{map-union} and @code{map-intersection} return a map whose domain is respectively
the union or intersection of the domains of the arguments.  To compute the range value for each key
that appears on both maps, they call a function supplied as their optional third argument; this
function defaults to one that just returns its second argument, so the second map shadows the first
one:

@example
> @b{(map-union m3 m4)}
##@{| (A 1) (B 3) (C 4) |@}
> @b{(defparameter m8 (map ('a (set 1)) ('b (set 2)) :default (set)))}
M8
> m8
##@{| (A ##@{ 1 @}) (B ##@{ 2 @}) |@}/##@{ @}
> @b{(defparameter m9 (map ('b (set "x")) ('c (set "y")) :default (set)))}
M9
> m9
##@{| (B ##@{ "x "@}) (C ##@{" y" @}) |@}/##@{ @}
> @b{(map-union m8 m9 #'union)}
##@{| (A ##@{ 1 @}) (B ##@{ 2 "x "@}) (C ##@{ "y "@}) |@}/##@{ @}
> @b{(map-intersection m8 m9 #'union)}
##@{| (B ##@{ 2 "x" @}) |@}/##@{ @}
@end example

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Seqs Tutorial
@subsubsection Seqs Tutorial
Seq indexing is 0-origin, like indexing of CL sequences (@code{cl:elt} etc.).

Seq creation can be done with @code{empty-seq} or the @code{seq} constructor macro:

@example
> @b{(empty-seq)}
#[ ]
> @b{(defparameter q1 (seq 1 2 'a))}
Q1
> q1
#[ 1 2 A ]
> @b{(defparameter q2 (seq "x" ($ q1) "y"))}
Q2
> q2
#["x" 1 2 A "y"]
@end example

Seqs have operations to access, add, and remove elements at the ends:

@example
> @b{(first q1)}
1
T
> @b{(last q1)}
A
T
> @b{(with-first q1 3)}
#[ 3 1 2 A ]
> @b{(with-last q1 7)}
#[ 1 2 A 7 ]
> @b{(less-first q2)}
#[ 1 2 A "y" ]
> @b{(less-last q2)}
#[ "x" 1 2 A ]
@end example

For indexing purposes, a seq is like a map whose keys are integers.  Indexing is done with @code{@@} (or
@code{lookup}):

@example
> @b{(@ q1 2)}
A
T
> @b{(@ q1 17)}
NIL
NIL
@end example

As you see, we again use a second value to indicate that the index was in bounds.  Like maps, seqs
allow you to specify the default to be returned for an out-of-bounds index:

@example
> @b{(setq q2 (with-default q2 0))}
#[ "x" 1 2 A "y" ]/0
> @b{(@ q2 47)}
0
NIL
@end example

There are two different ways to get a new element into a seq: @code{with} updates an element at a
specific index (it can also be used to append an element); @code{insert} inserts an element at the given
index:

@example
> @b{(with q1 1 7)}
#[ 1 7 A ]
> @b{(insert q1 1 7)}
#[ 1 7 2 A ]
> @b{(with q1 3 42)}
#[ 1 2 A 42 ]
@end example

If @code{with} is given an out-of-bounds index, it extends the sequence as needed by inserting copies of
the default:

@example
> @b{(with q2 8 "yow!")}
#[ "x" 1 2 A "y" 0 0 0 "yow!" ]/0
@end example

To delete the element at a given index, use @code{less}:

@example
> @b{(less q1 1)}
#[ 1 A ]
@end example

Other interesting operations on seqs are @code{subseq} and @code{concat}:

@example
> @b{(defparameter q3 (concat q1 q2))}
Q3
> q3
#[ 1 2 A "x" 1 2 A "y" ]
> @b{(subseq q3 1 5)}
#[ 2 A "x" 1 ]
@end example

Seqs also support the generic CL sequence operations @code{find}, @code{position}, etc.  (Be sure to call the
versions of these functions whose names are in the @code{fset2:} package.)

@c ----------------------------------------
@node Bags Tutorial
@subsubsection Bags Tutorial

A bag (sometimes called a multiset) is much like a set except that it associates with each element a
natural number (nonnegative integer) called the @strong{multiplicity}, which represents the number
of occurrences of the element in the bag.  So, for instance, if you start with an empty bag and add an
element to it twice, the resulting bag will contain that element with multiplicity 2.  Removing the
same element once leaves it in the bag with multiplicity 1.

The basics should be familiar by now (once you get used to the print syntax, at least; the @code{#%}
inclusions are for elements with multiplicity greater than 1):

@example
> @b{(empty-bag)}
##@{% %@}
> @b{(defparameter b1 (bag 1 2 1))}
B1
> b1
##@{% #%(1 2) 2 %@}
> @b{(with b1 3)}
##@{% #%(1 2) 2 3 %@}
> @b{(less b1 1)}
##@{% 1 2 %@}
> @b{(bag ($ b1) 2 3)}
##@{% #%(1 2) #%(2 2) 3 %@}
> @b{(defparameter b2 (bag 2 2 3))}
B2
> b2
##@{% #%(2 2) 3 %@}
> @b{(union b1 b2)}
##@{% #%(1 2) #%(2 2) 3 %@}
> @b{(intersection b1 b2)}
##@{% 2 %@}
> @b{(bag-sum b1 b2)}
##@{% #%(1 2) #%(2 3) 3 %@}
> @b{(bag-product b1 b2)}
##@{% #%(2 2) %@}
> @b{(size b1)}
3
> @b{(set-size b1)}
2
@end example

@code{union} and @code{intersection} take the @code{max} and @code{min} of the multiplicities of
each element, respectively; @code{bag-sum} and @code{bag-product} take their sum and product.  The
standard operation @code{size} returns the total multiplicity; to get the number of unique elements,
use @code{set-size}.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Nested collections
@subsection Nested collections
FSet fully supports nesting of collections.  Sets of sets, maps keyed by seqs, @dots{} all these
combinations Just Work™ with no further effort on your part.  Such types don't necessarily arise
frequently during ordinary application programming, but they do show up in compiler and static
analysis work.  The state table of an LALR parser generator, for instance, is basically a map keyed
by sets of sequences (the LR(0) items); such a type can be manipulated quite directly and elegantly
in FSet.

Here's a hypothetical example of where such nesting might come in handy.  Say you're organizing a
huge dinner party with over 200 guests, to be held in a large ballroom with many circular tables.
You have some data about each guest --- their personality, their profession, their interests, their
tastes --- and a model that tells you how compatible two people are based on that information.  You
want to organize them into tables such that the people at each table are all fairly compatible, but
also to have enough variety at each table to keep the conversation interesting.

So you have some code that can take a set of people and assign a score, and you are going to do some
search to try to make it so all the tables score fairly high (no point in going for the absolute
optimum, since your scoring model isn't perfect anyway).  To do that, you're going to want to keep
track of the score for each set that you construct, and the natural way to do that is with a map
whose keys are the sets.

Admittedly, this isn't exactly @emph{difficult} to do with Common Lisp's builtin types.  You could
keep the sets as lists, each sorted in a canonical order so there's only one possible list
representation for each set, and use a CL hash table with @code{equal} as its test function.  But
with FSet, you don't even have to think about it; just build the sets and put them in the map.  FSet
handles the rest.

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Assignment and updating
@subsection Assignment and updating
FSet provides several macros which are handy for updating variables that hold collections.  (Their
names all end in "f", following @code{setf}.) These might appear at first glance to be mutating
operators, but of course, they're not; they perform a functional update, reassigning the result to
the place holding the collection:

@example
> @b{(defparameter s (set 1 2))}
S
> s
##@{ 1 2 @}
> @b{(defparameter s1 s)}
S1
> s1
##@{ 1 2 @}
> @b{(includef s 3)}
##@{ 1 2 3 @}
> @b{s1}
##@{ 1 2 @}
> @b{(excludef s1 1)}
##@{ 2 @}
> @b{s}
##@{ 1 2 3 @}
@end example

Some of these also work with maps, and there's a @code{setf} method for @code{@@} (or
@code{lookup}).  The ability, mentioned above, to specify a default for the map is very handy here:

@example
> @b{(defparameter m2 (empty-map 0))}
M2
> m2
##@{| |@}/0
> @b{(incf (@ m2 'x))}
1
> @b{m2}
##@{| (x 1) |@}/0
> @b{(defparameter m3 (empty-map (empty-set)))}
M3
> m3
##@{| |@}/##@{@}
> @b{(includef (@ m3 'foo) "bar")}
##@{ "bar" @}
> @b{m3}
##@{| (FOO ##@{ "bar" @}) |@}/##@{@}
@end example

This works to multiple levels too, e.g., a map from something to maps from something else to sets.
